When You Smile, the World Smiles with You

A strange thing happened in Tanzania in 1962. At a mission boarding
school for girls near Lake Victoria in the Bukoba District, there was an
epidemic of laughter. And this was not just a few schoolgirls sharing a joke.
An irresistible desire to laugh broke out and spread from person to person
until more than one thousand people were affected.

The affliction had an abrupt onset, and the initial bout of laughter lasted
between a few minutes and a few hours in those affected. This was followed
by a period of normal behavior, then typically a few relapses over the course
of up to sixteen days. In what was to be a clue about the real nature of this
epidemic, the victims often described feeling restless and fearful, despite their
laughter.

The physicians who first investigated and reported on the outbreak—Dr.
Rankin, a faculty member at Makerere University, and Dr. Philip, the medical
officer of the Bukoba District—were extremely thorough. 1 They found that
each new patient had recent contact with another person suffering from the
malady. They were able to observe that the incubation period between contact
and onset of symptoms ranged from a few hours to a few days. Thankfully, as
they intoned without irony, “no fatal cases have been reported.” Afflicted
persons recovered fully.

The epidemic began on January 30, 1962, when three girls aged twelve to
eighteen started laughing uncontrollably. It spread rapidly, and soon most
people at the school had a serious case of the giggles. By March 18, ninety-
five of the 159 pupils were affected, and the school was forced to close. The



pupils went home to their villages and towns. Ten days later, the
uncontrollable laughter broke out in the village of Nshamba, fifty-five miles
away, where some of the students had gone. A total of 217 people were
affected. Other girls returned to their village near the Ramanshenye Girls’
Middle School, and the epidemic spread to this school in mid-June. It too was
forced to close when forty-eight of 154 students were stricken with
uncontrollable laughter. Another outbreak occurred in the village of
Kanyangereka on June 18, again when a girl went home. The outbreak started
with her immediate family and spread to two nearby boys’ schools, and those
schools were also forced to close. After a few months, the epidemic petered
out.

Rankin and Philip looked hard for biological causes for the epidemic.
They performed physical examinations and lab studies on the patients, did
spinal taps, examined the food supply for toxins, and ascertained that there
was no prior record of a similar epidemic in the region. The villagers
themselves did not know what to make of it. In Bukoba, where the illness
aroused great interest, there was the “belief that the atmosphere had been
poisoned as a result of the atom bomb explosions.” Others described it as a
kind of “spreading madness” or “endwara yokusheka,” which means simply,
“the illness of laughing.”

As the villagers and the scientists investigating this outbreak realized, the
epidemic was no laughing matter. It did not involve the spread of real
happiness and joy—though this can happen too, albeit not in quite the same
way. Rather, the outbreak was a case of epidemic hysteria, a condition that
takes advantage of a deep-rooted tendency of human beings to exhibit
emotional contagion. Emotions of all sorts, joyful or otherwise, can spread
between pairs of people and among larger groups. Consequently, emotions
have a collective and not just an individual origin. How you feel depends on
how those to whom you are closely and distantly connected feel.

Our Ancestors Had Feelings

We all have emotions. And they consist of several elements. First, we usually
have a conscious awareness of our emotions: when we are happy, we know it.



Second, emotions typically affect our physical state: we show how we feel on
our faces, in our voices, even in our posture; given the role emotions play in
social networks, these physical manifestations are especially important.
Third, emotions are associated with specific neurophysiological activity; if
you are shown a scary picture, the flow of blood to structures deep in your
brain instantly changes. Finally, emotions are associated with visible
behaviors, like laughing, crying, or shrieking. 2

Experiments have demonstrated that people can “catch” emotional states
they observe in others over time frames ranging from seconds to weeks. 3

When college freshmen are randomly assigned to live with mildly depressed
roommates, they become increasingly depressed over a three-month period. 4
Emotional contagion can even take place between strangers, after just
ephemeral contact. When waiters are trained to provide “service with a
smile,” their customers report feeling more satisfied, and they leave better
tips. 5 People’s emotions and moods are affected by the emotional states of
the people they interact with. Why and how does this happen?

We might consider another question first: Why aren’t emotions merely
internal states? Why don’t we just have our own private feelings? Having
feelings is surely evolutionarily advantageous to us. For example, the ability
to feel startled is probably good for us in situations where we need to react
quickly to survive. But we do not just feel startled, we show that we are
startled. We jump or shriek or curse or clench, and these actions do not go
unnoticed. They are copied by others.

Given the organization of early hominids into social groups, the spread of
emotions served an evolutionarily adaptive purpose. 6 Early humans had to
rely on one another for survival. Their interactions with the physical
environment (weather, landscape, predators) were modulated or affected by
their interactions with their social environment. Humans bonded with others
in order to face the world more effectively, and mechanisms evolved to
support this bonding, most obviously verbal communication but also
emotional mimicry. The development of emotions in humans, the display of
emotions, and the ability to read the emotions of others helped coordinate
group activity by three means: facilitating interpersonal bonds, synchronizing
behavior, and communicating information.

Emotions and emotional contagion probably first arose to facilitate
mother-infant pair bonding and then evolved to extend to kin members and
ultimately to nonkin members. Emotional contagion fosters interaction



synchrony. At the level of mother-child pairs, emotional contagion may have
prompted mothers to be more attentive to and protective of their babies when
their babies needed attention. Indeed, we are sadder when our family
members are sad than when strangers are sad. There is an advantage in
coordinating our moods with those to whom we are related.

Eventually this type of synchrony in mood or activity may have been
beneficial for larger group activities, such as warding off enemies or hunting
prey. If you are trying to coordinate a hunting party, it helps if members of
the group are all upbeat and fired up. Conversely, if you are part of a group
and someone in it appears afraid, perhaps that person has seen a predator that
you have not seen. Quickly adopting his emotional state can enhance your
prospects for survival. Indeed, it is thought that positive emotions may work
especially well to increase group cohesiveness (“I’m happy; stay with me”)
and that negative emotions may work well as communication devices (“I
smell smoke; I’m scared”).

Emotions may be a quicker way to convey information about the
environment and its relative safety or danger than other forms of
communication, and it seems certain that emotions preceded language. What
emotions lack in specificity compared to oral language, they may make up for
in speed. You can tell whether your spouse is mad at you very quickly, but
having her explain it to you may take a good deal more time (especially if she
insists that you guess why she is mad before she tells you). You can walk
through the door at home at the end of the day and immediately know
whether the environment is safe or dangerous, and that is quite a trick our
ancestors bequeathed us.

Of course, rapidly coordinated emotions are not always a good thing. If
you come home and are in a bad mood, your partner will often detect it long
before you resort to the more laborious process of explaining why you are in
a bad mood. And before you have a chance to explain, she might already
have caught your bad mood, which may lead to an argument and a downward
spiral.

Emotional Contagion



Emotions spread from person to person because of two features of human
interaction: we are biologically hardwired to mimic others outwardly, and in
mimicking their outward displays, we come to adopt their inward states. If
your friend feels happy, she smiles, you smile, and in the act of smiling you
also come to feel happy. In bars and bedrooms, at work and on the street,
everywhere people interact, we tend to synchronize our facial expressions,
vocalizations, and postures unconsciously and rapidly, and as a result we also
meld our emotional states.

Nowhere do we show our emotions more than on our faces. It is not
difficult to explain why our facial expressions change in response to
environmental stimuli or how this may be evolutionarily adaptive. Recent
research, for example, has provided insight into how two facial expressions,
fear and disgust, moderate our reception of sensations coming from the
outside world. 7 When we are terrified, our eyes widen and our nostrils flare
to help us see and smell more of our surroundings, just as the ears of a dog
perk up when it hears something interesting. Similarly, when we are
disgusted, such as by an offensive odor, our noses wrinkle and our eyes
narrow to reduce the impact. Air intake increases when we are afraid and
decreases when we are disgusted.

Yet, facial expressions appear to have evolved not just to modify our
experience of the world as individuals but as a way to communicate with
others. Over time, this aspect of facial expressions probably eclipsed their
original role. Such changes happen often in evolution. Feathers may have
arisen merely to insulate the bodies of prehistoric reptiles, but they wound up
contributing to a different and more important advantage, the ability to fly.

We developed an ability to read the facial expressions of others. Hence,
we benefit when our own faces are contorted in disgust and by being able to
notice whether others’ faces are contorted in disgust. Humans have an
extraordinary knack for detecting even small changes in facial expressions.
This ability is localized in a particular area of the brain and can even be lost,
a condition tongue-twistingly known as prosopagnosia. Reading the
expressions of others was probably a key step on the way toward
synchronizing feelings and developing the emotional empathy that underlies
the process of emotional contagion.

Even as early as 1759, it was apparent to founding economist and
philosopher Adam Smith that conscious thought was one way we could feel
for others and hence feel like others: “Though our brother is upon the rack…



by the imagination we place ourselves in his situation, we conceive ourselves
enduring all the same torments, we enter as it were into his body, and become
in some measure the same person with him, and thence form some idea of his
sensations, and even feel something which, though weaker in degree, is not
altogether unlike them.” 8

However, emotions spread in ways beyond simply reading faces and
thinking about the experiences of others. There is actually a more primitive,
less deliberative process of emotional contagion, a kind of instinctive
empathy. People imitate the facial expressions of others, then, as a direct
result, they come to feel as others do. This is called affective afference, or the
facial-feedback theory, since the path of the signals is from the muscles (of
the face) to the brain, rather than the more usual, efferent pathway from the
brain to the muscles. The beneficial effects of facial expressions on a
person’s mood are among the reasons, for example, that telephone operators
are trained to smile when they work, even though the person at the other end
of the line cannot see them. This theory also explains why it helps to smile
when your heart is breaking.

One biological mechanism that makes emotions (and behaviors)
contagious may be the so-called mirror neuron system in the human brain. 9

Our brains practice doing actions we merely observe in others, as if we were
doing them ourselves. If you’ve ever watched an intense fan at a game, you
know what we are talking about—he twitches at every mistake, aching to
give his own motor actions to the players on the field. When we see players
run, jump, or kick, it is not only our visual cortex or even the part of our brain
that thinks about what we are observing that is activated, but also the parts of
our brain that would be activated if we ourselves were running, jumping, or
kicking.

In one experiment related to emotional contagion, subjects listened to
recordings of nonverbal vocal reactions communicating two positive
emotions, such as amusement and triumph, and two negative emotions, such
as fear and disgust. Investigators monitored the subjects’ brains for a
response by placing them in a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) machine.
10 The subjects were told not to react to what they heard. While subjects did
not visibly respond to the sounds, the MRI results showed that hearing the
cues stimulated parts of the brain that command the corresponding facial
expressions. It seems we are always poised to feel what others feel and to do
what others do.



Emotional Stampedes

Everyone has experience with emotional contagion: we share a joke with a
friend, we feel sad when a spouse cries, we rage against city hall with our
neighbors, and we hug our kids tight when they’ve had a bad day. Yet one
often overlooked aspect of all this sharing is that emotions spread not only to
our friends but to our friends’ friends and beyond—even when we are not
present. We are like a herd of buffalo quietly grazing on the plain until one of
our neighbors starts to run. Then we start to run, and others start to run, and
suddenly, mysteriously, the whole herd is barreling forward.

Epidemics of emotional states have been reported for centuries. They just
have not involved laughter like the Bukoba outbreak. When emotions spread
from person to person and affect large numbers of people, it is now called
mass psychogenic illness (MPI) rather than the old-fashioned and more poetic
epidemic hysteria. MPI is a specifically social phenomenon involving
otherwise healthy people in a psychological cascade. Like a single startled
buffalo within a herd, a single emotional reaction in one person can
sometimes cause many others to feel the same thing, creating an emotional
stampede.

There are two main types of MPI. In the pure-anxiety type, people may
feel a variety of physical symptoms, including abdominal pain, headache,
fainting, shortness of breath, nausea, dizziness, and so on. In the motor type,
people may engage in hysterical dancing, pseudoseizures, and—yes—
laughing, though the actual feelings underlying these behaviors are fear or
anxiety. Both types of MPI thus involve the same basic psychological
processes.

Historical records of such phenomena date back to at least 1374, when, in
close succession to the Black Death in Europe, “dancing manias” broke out.
The first such manias occurred in what is now Aachen, Germany. As
described by the German medical historian J. F. C. Hecker in his 1844 book
The Epidemics of the Middle Ages, these consisted of people who “united by
one common delusion, exhibited to the public both in the streets and in the
churches the following strange spectacle. They formed circles hand in hand,
and appeared to have lost all control over their senses, continued dancing,
regardless of the bystanders, for hours together, in wild delirium, until at
length they fell to the ground in a state of exhaustion. They then complained



of extreme oppression, and groaned as if in the agonies of death.” 11 These
people were obviously no happier to be dancing than the African schoolgirls
were to be laughing.

In a bygone era, demons and witchcraft were often seen as causes of these
symptoms, but today toxic chemicals and environmental contamination are
the triggers subjects typically identify. Yet, while toxins do cause some
outbreaks of physical illness, they do not cause outbreaks of MPI. The source
of the problem, as well as the mechanism of transmission, is psychological.
Individuals afflicted in these outbreaks, and many observers, are often
reluctant to ascribe the symptoms to a psychological source, however.

A relatively recent example of MPI occurred at the Warren County High
School in McMinnville, Tennessee. At the time, the school had 1,825
students and 140 staff members. On November 12, 1998, a teacher believed
she smelled gasoline, which caused her to complain of headache, shortness of
breath, dizziness, and nausea. Seeing her response, some of her students soon
developed similar symptoms. As the classroom was being emptied, other
students, observing what was happening, began to report feeling unwell too.
A schoolwide fire alarm was activated, and the school was evacuated. The
teacher and several students were transported by ambulance to a nearby
hospital, in full view of other students and teachers who were outside because
of the alarm. Large numbers of police, firefighters, and emergency medical
personnel from three counties responded. A total of one hundred people went
to the hospital that day, and thirty-eight were admitted. Classes were
canceled.

The school was closed for four days. It was inspected by the fire
department, the gas company, and state officials from the Occupational
Safety and Health Administration (OSHA), but no problems were identified.
After the school had been deemed perfectly safe, the students and the
teachers were allowed to return. Unfortunately many still smelled odors, and
on November 17, seventy-one people were stricken. Ambulances were again
called, and the school was evacuated and then closed.

The school’s principal was fed up. In a “no more Mr. Nice Guy” move, he
decided to call several government agencies, including the famed Epidemic
Intelligence Service of the Centers for Disease Control (CDC). Also involved
were the federal Environmental Protection Agency, the Agency for Toxic
Substances and Disease Registry, the National Institute for Occupational
Safety and Health, OSHA, the Tennessee Department of Health, the



Tennessee Department of Agriculture, and numerous other local emergency
organizations and personnel. The investigation was extremely thorough.
Aerial surveillance identified potential environmental sources of
contamination; personnel explored caves in the vicinity of the school; the
school’s air-handling, plumbing, and structural systems were thoroughly
checked; core samples were drilled from the grounds around the school; and
air samples (including from the days of the outbreak) and water and waste
samples were tested. The air was evaluated with an astonishing array of
technology, including colorimetric tubes, flame-ionization detectors,
photoionization detectors, radiation meters, and combustible-gas indicators.

Two years later, a New England Journal of Medicine article described the
extensive examination of possible environmental causes for the illness and
reported the results of the investigation by the CDC. In the end, like Rankin
and Philip studying the African laughter epidemic, the investigators
concluded that psychogenic factors were to blame. They found that the illness
was associated with directly observing another ill person during the outbreak
and with being female. 12 The diagnosis was epidemic hysteria.

This diagnosis did not sit well with the community, and it upset many of
those who had been ill, such as one twelfth grader who was quoted as saying,
“They said we were crazy… . It just made me mad. When I’m sick, I don’t
want someone to say I’m faking. They wouldn’t have taken me to the
hospital, and my blood pressure wouldn’t have been sky-high, if I wasn’t
sick.” 13 Of course, the symptoms of those with MPI, whether laughing,
dancing, fainting, or nausea, are quite real; they do not “fake” their
experience in the deliberate, premeditated way that a malingerer does. The
astonishing reality is that our own anxiety makes us sick, but so does the
anxiety of others.

The CDC investigators also discussed why communities tended to use so
many resources to try to find environmental causes for conditions that
appeared to be psychogenic. The problem is that while public health
professionals often suspect that an outbreak is psychogenic, they feel they
have no choice but to conduct an unreasonably thorough investigation
because of intense anxiety in the community. And, of course, it is very
difficult, if not impossible, to definitively prove that a mysterious toxic
exposure has not simply escaped detection. The CDC investigators noted the
possibility of a negative community reaction to an episode labeled as
psychogenic, saying, “Physicians and others are understandably reluctant to



announce that an outbreak of illness is psychogenic because of the shame and
anger that the diagnosis tends to elicit.” 14

An Unbearable Sweetness

Outbreaks of epidemic hysteria are not restricted to children and schools.
They have been documented in adults too. One systematic review of cases of
epidemic hysteria identified seventy outbreaks that occurred between 1973
and 1993 and found that 50 percent of them took place in schools, 40 percent
in small towns and factories, and only 10 percent in other settings. 15 The
outbreaks usually involved at least thirty people, and often hundreds. Most
outbreaks lasted less than two weeks, but 20 percent lasted more than a
month.

One of the more improbable examples was the case of the “phantom
anesthetist of Mattoon.” In 1944, over a period of a few weeks during the
climax of World War II, many adult residents of Mattoon, Illinois, became
convinced that an “evil genius” was on the loose in their town of fifteen
thousand people. This unseen person would open bedroom windows and
spray victims with a “sweet-smelling” anesthetic gas that would temporarily
paralyze them but, strangely, leave others in the same room unaffected.
Citizens banded together to form armed patrols, but the anesthetist was never
caught. The local sheriff, fearing that an innocent person might be shot,
eventually ordered the posses to disband. As one investigator of this outbreak
dryly noted, “The ‘gasser’ hypothesis asserts that the symptoms were
produced by a gas which was sprayed on the victims by some ingenious fiend
who has been able to elude the police. This explanation… is widely believed
in Mattoon at present. The alternative hypothesis is that the symptoms were
due to hysteria.” 16

Another, more recent case occurred in 1990 among the Triborough Bridge
toll employees in New York City. On February 16, workers began to
complain of headaches, abdominal discomfort, dizziness, and throat and chest
pain. More and more workers came down with the same symptoms over the
next several days, with some of the ill workers noting what they described as
a “sweetness” in the air. Symptoms were reported when workers were inside



or near a toll booth, but they would subside soon after workers left the
booths. The outbreak ended on February 22, when some of the workers’
superiors sat with them at the tolls. By that time, thirty-four workers had
become ill enough to go to the hospital, and many others shared their
symptoms. After spending hundreds of thousands of dollars searching in vain
among dozens of potential culprits for a physical cause of the symptoms, it
became clear to many that the illness was psychogenic. It forced 44 percent
of the female workers to go to the hospital, almost twice the proportion of
male workers with debilitating symptoms.

These cases share many characteristics of MPI. The symptoms tend to pop
up in and spread through highly connected communities (with high network
transitivity). These communities tend to be isolated and stressed. A physical
culprit is seldom found. In most cases, the majority of those affected are
women. It is not clear why the incidence in women and girls is higher, but it
is possible that because women are inclined to discuss their symptoms, more
sympathy cases result in other women. The fact that women have a more
sensitive sense of smell might also play a role.

For some reason that is not well understood, smells, both real and
imagined, are frequent triggers of modern outbreaks of MPI. This may have
to do with the well-established connection between olfaction and emotions.
Experiments have demonstrated that smell and emotion are both regulated by
a part of the brain called the orbito-frontal cortex. 17 Experiments have also
shown that memories evoked by smell induce stronger emotions than those
evoked by verbal descriptions of the same odor. 18 Words are powerful, but
one familiar whiff can jolt the mind into the past with more emotional
intensity than can a signal from any other sense. This is called the Proust
phenomenon, after the author who described a poignant memory inspired by
the scent of a cookie. Smelling a perfume associated with a happy memory
leads to more activity in the amygdala (a part of the brain involved in
emotion and emotional memory) than seeing the bottle that the perfume
comes in. 19

Paradoxically, the presence of official personnel—whether police officers,
rescue workers, scientific investigators, or government officials—often
worsens the epidemic, for it reinforces the belief that something serious is
going on and that the situation is potentially dangerous. When these same
officials attempt to provide reassurance that the situation is safe and that no
cause was found, it typically generates deep suspicions among the



emotionally charged populace that a cover-up is under way, especially
because the official response was previously so substantial. Paranoia can
spread too, undermining the very authority that is needed to bring an end to
such an episode.

The recommended treatment for MPI outbreaks focuses on social
networks and recognizes that social ties are the medium for spread. The
psychological guidelines for emergency workers include “providing
reassurance… using a calm and authoritative approach” and “separating those
who are ill from those who are not.” 20 As one expert put it, “You can only
stop these things by being honest… . I could get caught up in this kind of
thing too, as a parent or just a person. We all could. It’s a very powerful
thing, and it needs to be respected and understood. And health officials
shouldn’t be so scared to call a spade a spade.” 21

It’s often difficult to establish why exactly these epidemics start. Just as
an unfamiliar noise can trigger a cattle herd to start running, many triggers
can cause emotional stampedes. However, it is usually fairly simple to
identify the initial cases. For example, in the African laughing epidemic, even
though the investigators could not explain why it started, they easily located
the first girls to have symptoms.

It only took a few people to start La Ola in the stadium in Mexico City or
to get passersby to stop and look up at a window in New York City, and the
same is true of MPI outbreaks. When a small group of people begin acting in
concert or experiencing similar, visible symptoms, the epidemic can spread
along social-network ties via emotional contagion, and large groups can very
quickly become emotionally synchronized.

The present obsession with nut allergies in the United States may be a
case in point. The number of schools declaring themselves to be entirely “nut
free” is by all accounts rising. Nuts and staples like peanut butter are
prohibited from campus, and so are homemade baked goods and any foods
without detailed ingredient labels. School entrances have signs admonishing
visitors to wash their hands before entering to safeguard students from
possible contamination.

Approximately 3.3 million Americans are allergic to nuts, and even more,
6.9 million, are allergic to seafood. However, all told, serious allergic
reactions to foods cause just two thousand hospitalizations per year (out of
more than thirty million hospitalizations nationwide). And, at most, only 150
people (both children and adults) die each year from food allergies. Compare



that to the fifty people who die each year from bee stings, the hundred who
die from lightning strikes, and the forty-five thousand who die from motor
vehicle accidents. Or compare that to the ten thousand children who are
hospitalized each year for traumatic brain injuries acquired during sports, or
the two thousand who drown, or the roughly thirteen hundred who die from
gun accidents. Yet there are no calls to end athletics. There are likely
thousands of parents who rid their cupboards of peanut butter but not guns.
And more children assuredly die walking or being driven to school each year
than die of nut allergies.

The question is not whether nut allergies exist, or whether they can
occasionally be serious, or whether reasonable accommodations should be
made for the few children who have documented serious allergies. The
question is, what accounts for society’s extreme response to nut allergies?
Not surprisingly, the response bears many of the hallmarks of MPI. A few
people have clinically documented concerns, but others who do not then copy
the behaviors of those who do. Anxiety spreads from person to person to
person, and a sense of proportion and the ability to be reassured are lost.

Well-intentioned efforts to reduce nut exposure actually fan the flames
since they indicate to parents that nuts are a clear and present danger. This
encourages more parents to worry, which fuels the epidemic. It also
encourages more parents to have their kids tested, thus detecting mild and
meaningless allergies to nuts. And, finally, this encourages still more
avoidance of nuts, which may actually lead to a rise in true nut allergies
because lack of exposure to allergens early in life is thought to contribute to
the onset of allergies later. 22

MPI is a pathological phenomenon, but it takes advantage of a
nonpathological process that is fundamental in humans, namely, the tendency
to mimic the emotional state of others. Real laughter also can be contagious
and so can real happiness. But comparing epidemic hysteria to these more
normal processes is like comparing the stampede of a herd to its more usual
and orderly migration.

Tracking the Spread of Emotions



Measuring the subjective experience of emotions (as compared with their
visible, biological, or neurological manifestations) requires asking people
how they are feeling. One of the more systematic ways of doing this is known
as the experience-sampling method. This method uses a series of alerts (such
as signals sent to a beeper or cell phone) at unexpected times to prompt
subjects to document their feelings, thoughts, and actions while they are
experiencing them. 23 The result is a thorough picture of the ups and downs
of subjects’ daily emotional lives.

One of the advantages of this method is that it allows groups of interacting
people to be evaluated simultaneously in real time. For example, one team of
investigators, interested in the spread of emotions within families, outfitted
fifty-five families (consisting of a mother, father, and one adolescent) with
beepers for one week. The participants were beeped roughly every 90 to 120
minutes between 7:30 a.m. and 9:30 p.m., and a total of 7,100 time points
were observed in these 165 individuals. Various emotional states were
measured, such as whether the subjects were happy or unhappy. Although the
investigators could not rule out the possibility that the entire family was
simultaneously exposed to one thing that made them all sad or happy at once
(a confounding effect that we will discuss in greater detail in chapter 4), they
did try to tease out how emotions spread within these families.

The strongest path was from daughters to both parents, while, conversely,
the parents’ emotional state appeared to have no effect on their daughters.
Fathers’ emotions affected their wives and their sons but not their daughters.
This appeared to be especially true when fathers returned from work: when
dad came home in a lousy mood, he soon made the whole household
miserable. 24

A similar method has been used to examine the transmission of emotions
among teams of nurses, athletes, and even accountants. 25 In such
professional settings, a key question was whether one fired-up team member
could improve the mood and thus the performance of his teammates. Not
surprisingly, positive mood is associated with a range of team-performance-
enhancing changes, including greater altruistic behavior, increased creativity,
and more efficient decision making. A nice demonstration involved outfitting
thirty-three professional male cricket players with pocket computers that
recorded their moods four times a day during a match (which can have the
insane duration of five days). There was a strong association between a
player’s own happiness and the happiness of his teammates, independent of



the state of the game; further, when a player’s teammates were happier, the
team’s performance improved.

The Spread of Happiness

Despite the biological and psychological evidence for emotional mimicry,
and the numerous cases of MPI arising from epidemic anxiety, until recently
little was known about the precise role of social networks in the spread of
emotions. Yet, the MPI cases suggest that emotions spread far and wide,
flowing through social-network ties from person to person to person, and that
there should be a normal analogue to this pathological phenomenon. Indeed,
there can be waves of emotions in the vast fabric of human social
relationships, so that people in particular locations in the social network have
one emotional experience, and others elsewhere who come under different
influences have a different experience altogether.

Strangely, while researchers in diverse fields, including medicine,
economics, psychology, neuroscience, and evolutionary biology, have
identified a broad range of stimuli of individual human happiness, they have
not addressed a key (perhaps the key) determinant: the happiness of others. It
may be obvious that our friends and family can make us happy, but before we
undertook our own investigation, no one had ever explored how happiness
can spread through social networks from person to person to person.

We became curious about this. We were particularly interested in
determining whether the spread of emotions occurred not just between you
and your friends (dyadic spread) but also between you and your friends’
friends, and their friends, and beyond (hyper-dyadic spread). How far did
emotions travel in the network? And were there geographic or temporal
constraints on the spread?

Our first step in answering these questions was to assemble a data set that
had measures of emotions and social connections over time. (We discuss that
process in chapter 4.) We then created a graph of the social network of
happiness, as shown in plate 1. This illustration shows ties among siblings,
friends, and spouses in a sample drawn from 12,067 people originally from
Framingham, Massachusetts, in the year 2000, along with their levels of



happiness. No one had ever plotted such a graph before. One thousand twenty
people are represented, and each node is colored on a spectrum from blue
(unhappy) to yellow (happy) according to the subject’s level of happiness.
Looking at this image suggests two observations. First, unhappy people
cluster with unhappy people in the network, and happy people cluster with
happy people. Second, unhappy people seem more peripheral: they are much
more likely to appear at the end of a chain of social relationships or at the
edge of the network. 26

Clustering of this kind in social networks can arise from a variety of
processes. Happy people might choose each other as friends or be exposed to
the same environments that cause them all to be happy at the same time. But
our analyses allowed us to adjust for these effects. And we found that
clustering is also due to the causal effect of one person’s happiness on
another’s. Mathematical analyses of the network suggest that a person is
about 15 percent more likely to be happy if a directly connected person (at
one degree of separation) is happy. And the spread of happiness doesn’t stop
there. The happiness effect for people at two degrees of separation (the friend
of a friend) is 10 percent, and for people at three degrees of separation (the
friend of a friend of a friend), it is about 6 percent. At four degrees of
separation, the effect peters out. Here we have our first evidence of the Three
Degrees of Influence Rule. Emotions (and, as we will see later, norms and
behaviors) spread in social networks from person to person to person, but
they do not spread to everyone. Just as a ripple in a pond eventually fades
away, so too does the ripple of an individual’s happiness fade through the
social network.

At first glance, these effects may not seem very significant. But compare
them to the effect of having a higher income. An extra $5,000 in 1984 dollars
(which corresponds to about $10,000 in 2009 dollars) was associated with
only a 2 percent increased chance of a person being happy. So, having happy
friends and relatives appears to be a more effective predictor of happiness
than earning more money. And the amazing thing is that even people who are
three degrees removed from you, whom you may have never met, can have a
stronger impact on your personal happiness than a wad of hundreds in your
pocket. Being in a particular spot in a social network, exposed to people with
particular feelings, has important implications for your life.

It is well known that having more friends and relatives is much more
likely to put a smile on your face than having more cash. 27 But past research



had never considered why friends matter so much. There are at least two
possibilities. First, the existence of the social relationship itself may improve
your happiness—this is a structural effect of the network on you (the second
rule of social networks described in chapter 1). As we discuss in chapter 7,
we are hardwired to seek out social relationships, so it is not surprising that
we feel pleasure or reward when we spend time with friends and family.
Second, friends and relatives make us susceptible to emotional contagion, so
our friends’ emotional states affect our own (the third rule of social
networks).

While both of these mechanisms probably contribute to people’s
happiness, our evidence suggests that contagion may be the more important
of the two. We found that each happy friend a person has increases that
person’s probability of being happy by about 9 percent. Each unhappy friend
decreases it by 7 percent. So if you were simply playing the averages, and
you didn’t know anything about the emotional state of a new person you just
met, you would probably want to be friends with her. She might make you
unhappy, but there is a better chance she will make you happy. This helps to
explain why past researchers have found an association between happiness
and the number of friends and family. But once we control for the emotional
states in one’s friends, we find that having more friends is not enough—
having more happy friends is the key to our own emotional well-being.

This does not mean that the structure of the social network is unimportant.
Amazingly, it is not just the number of dyadic ties that has an impact; the
number of hyperdyadic ties also influences a person’s happiness. When we
measured the centrality of each person in the social network, we found that
people with more friends of friends were also more likely to be happy. And,
more remarkably, this was true even among people who had the same number
of direct social relationships. This means that the more friends your friends
have (regardless of their emotional state), the more likely you are to be
happy.

One might wonder if there is a chicken-and-egg problem here. After all, it
is possible to imagine that when we become happier, we tend to attract more
friends, and more friends who have lots of friends. This would mean that
happiness is driving the network rather than the other way around. But when
we examined how the network changes over time, we found that happy
people do not tend to become more central. So having a wide social circle can
make you happy, but being happy does not necessarily widen your social



circle. Being located in the middle of the network leads to happiness rather
than the other way around. The structure of your network and your location
in it matter.

Given how important direct interaction seems to be for emotional
contagion to occur, we also theorized that the effect of the happiness of your
social contacts on your emotional state should depend on how near or far they
are. The idea is that people who live nearby are more likely to be in contact
and therefore more likely to pick up on each others’ moods. Geographic
distance can be used as a proxy for frequency of social interaction. In our
study, about one in three people live within a mile of their closest friend, but
there is a lot of variation, and some friends live thousands of miles apart. We
found that when a friend who lives less than a mile away becomes happy, it
can increase the probability that you are happy by 25 percent. In contrast, the
happiness of a friend who lives more than a mile away has no effect.
Similarly, if your spouse lives with you and he or she becomes happy, then
your probability of happiness goes up, but spouses who do not live together
(because they are separated) have no effect on each other. A happy sibling
who lives less than a mile away increases your chance of happiness by 14
percent, but more distant siblings have no significant effect. And happy next-
door neighbors also increase your chance for happiness, while neighbors who
live farther away (even on the same block) have no significant effect.

All these findings suggest the importance of proximity among people
whose emotions influence each other, and the impact of immediate neighbors
suggests that the spread of happiness may depend as much on frequent face-
to-face interaction as on deep personal connections. While in this case we are
considering the spread of a dispositional state of some duration, these
findings are also in keeping with the work on facial mimicry we discussed
earlier.

Happiness is thus not merely a function of individual experience or
choice; it is also a property of groups of people. Changes in individual
happiness can ripple through social connections and create large-scale
patterns in the network, giving rise to clusters of happy and unhappy
individuals. Since our work was published, similar results on the spread of
happiness have been observed in a sample of ten thousand rural Chinese
villagers. 28 Although we could not observe what causes happiness to spread,
a variety of mechanisms are conceivable. Happy people may share their good
fortune (e.g., by being pragmatically helpful or financially generous to



others), change their behavior toward others (e.g., by being nicer or less
hostile), or merely exude an emotion that is contagious. Being surrounded by
happy people might have beneficial biological effects too. But whatever the
mechanism, it seems clear that we need to change the way we think about
happiness and other emotions.

Life on the Hedonic Treadmill

We all know people who are hedonists; they can never get enough of the
good life. In fact, lasting happiness is difficult to achieve because people are
on a “hedonic treadmill.” Although a change in a person’s circumstances may
cause him to be happier (e.g., finding a partner, winning the lottery) or sadder
(e.g., losing a job, becoming paralyzed), a broad body of research has shown
that people tend to return to their previous level of happiness after such
events. 29 In fact, studies of lottery winners and spinal cord injury patients
reveal that after a year or two, they are often no more happy or sad than the
rest of us. Our surprise at this observation stems in part from our inability to
anticipate that some things will not change. Lottery winners still have
annoying relatives, and paralyzed patients can still fall in love. As
psychologist Daniel Gilbert has shown, we tend to focus on only the most
salient part of a situation when we are thinking about things that might befall
us. 30 Moreover, we overlook our ability to adapt to circumstances. So, a
person trying to become happier is like someone walking up a downward-
moving escalator. Although the effort to climb up and become happier is
helpful, it is counteracted by the process of adaptation that forces one back to
one’s original state.

Many people try to overcome this problem by intentionally engaging in
activities to improve their happiness. We might change our behavior by
exercising regularly or by trying to be kind to others or even by avoiding a
long commute (which has been shown to be particularly deleterious to
happiness). We might change our attitude by pausing to count our blessings
or thinking about experiences in the most positive light (as Tibetan monks
do). We might also devote effort to causes we find meaningful or strive to
achieve important personal goals. Indeed, there is reason to suspect that a



sustained effort to engage in such happiness-producing activities might help
us progress up the downward-moving escalator.

But in spite of these efforts, each of us tends to stay put in a particular
long-term disposition; we appear to have a set point for personal happiness
that is not easy to change. In fact, like other personality traits, personal
happiness appears to be strongly influenced by our genes. Studies of identical
and fraternal twins show that identical twins are significantly more likely to
exhibit the same level of happiness than are fraternal twins or other siblings.
Behavior geneticists have used these studies to estimate just how much genes
matter, and their best guess is that long-term happiness depends 50 percent on
a person’s genetic set point, 10 percent on their circumstances (e.g., where
they live, how rich they are, how healthy they are), and 40 percent on what
they choose to think and do. 31 What we experience in life can, of course,
change our moods for a period of time, but in most cases these changes are
transitory.

What about the network spread of happiness? Does it obey this constraint,
only making us happy for a while? Does the effect of having a friend become
happy tend to wear off? In our study, we found that a person is 45 percent
more likely to be happy if a friend became happy in the previous six months.
In contrast, the effect is only 35 percent for friends who became happy within
the previous year, and it disappears after longer periods of time. So, our
friends’ happiness does have an effect on us, but it only lasts for about a year.
Just as lottery winners get used to their newfound wealth, we get used to our
friends being happy. But if different friends get happy at different points in
time, they might give us a periodic boost, helping us to stay above our natural
level of happiness.

Alone in the Crowd

If happiness can spread, at least for a while, what about other emotions? One
feeling that directly concerns our social network is loneliness. In some sense,
loneliness is the opposite of connection—it is the feeling of being
disconnected. Work by psychologist John Cacioppo has shown that
loneliness is a complex set of feelings experienced by people whose core



needs for intimacy and social connection are not met. 32 This often motivates
most (but not all) people to redress their situation, suggesting that the
function of loneliness is to promote reconnection (we will discuss the
evolutionary purpose of loneliness in chapter 7).

Psychologists have identified the way that feelings of loneliness fit in with
a broad set of other feelings and states, including self-esteem, anxiety, anger,
sadness, optimism, and shyness. Psychological research suggests that feelings
of loneliness occur when there is a discrepancy between our desire for
connection to others and the actual connections we have. This research has
focused on the subjective perception of being alone, but feeling lonely is not
the same thing. While studies have shown, unsurprisingly, that having a good
friend can decrease loneliness, what has not previously been examined is the
effect of the whole social network on our tendency to feel lonely even in a
crowd.

Using the same network in which we studied happiness, we examined
whether being alone was associated with feeling lonely and whether such
feelings could spread. 33 We found that real-world social connections do have
an effect on how we feel. People with more friends are less likely to
experience loneliness. Each extra friend reduces by about two days the
number of days we feel lonely each year. Since on average (in our data)
people feel lonely forty-eight days per year, having a couple of extra friends
makes you about 10 percent less lonely than other people. Interestingly, the
number of family members has no effect at all. It is not clear why this is the
case. Possibly, people in small families know they have a greater
responsibility to spend time with one another since there are fewer people to
take turns visiting. Or perhaps people in large families primarily feel close to
a smaller core of their family, limiting the influence of additional
connections. Regardless of the mechanism, it is clear that feelings of
loneliness are much more closely tied to our networks of optional social
connections than to those handed to us at birth.

Loneliness can actually shape the social network. People who feel lonely
all the time will lose about 8 percent of their friends, on average, over two to
four years. Lonely people tend to attract fewer friends, but they also tend to
name fewer people as friends as well. What this means is that loneliness is
both a cause and a consequence of becoming disconnected. Emotions and
networks can reinforce each other and create a rich-get-richer cycle that
rewards those with the most friends. People with few friends are more likely



to become lonely, and this feeling then makes it less likely that they will
attract or try to form new social ties.

Our study suggests that physical proximity matters as much for loneliness
as it does for happiness. Friends and family who live nearby see each other
more often, which should help decrease the likelihood that they feel lonely,
but it also makes them more susceptible to one another’s feelings. For
example, if a nearby friend has ten extra lonely days a year, it will increase
the number of lonely days you experience by about three. If this person is a
close friend, then the effect is stronger, and you’ll experience four extra days
of loneliness. Loneliness also spreads between next-door neighbors, with ten
extra days of loneliness leading to two extra days for the person on the other
side of the fence. But neighbors and friends who live more than a mile away
do not make each other lonely.

Spouses who live together can affect each other too, but the result is less
dramatic. For every ten extra days a person is lonely, his or her spouse will be
lonely for just one extra day. And siblings do not appear to affect one another
at all (even the ones who live nearby); this provides additional evidence that
loneliness is about our relationships to people with whom we choose to
connect rather than the relationships we have inherited.

Looking beyond these direct connections, we found that loneliness
spreads three degrees, just like happiness. A person’s loneliness depends not
only on his friends’ loneliness, but also on his friends’ friends’ and his
friends’ friends’ friends’ loneliness. The full network shows that you are
about 52 percent more likely to be lonely if a person you are directly
connected to (at one degree of separation) is lonely. The effect for people at
two degrees of separation is 25 percent, and for people at three degrees of
separation, it is about 15 percent. At four degrees of separation the effect
disappears, in keeping with the Three Degrees of Influence Rule.

Finally, we observed an extraordinary pattern at the edge of the social
network. At the periphery, people have fewer friends; this makes them
lonely, but this also tends to drive them to cut the few ties that they have left.
But before they do, they may infect their friends with the same feeling of
loneliness, starting the cycle anew. These reinforcing effects mean that our
social fabric can fray at the edges, like a strand of yarn that comes loose from
the sleeve of a sweater. If we are concerned about combating the feeling of
loneliness in our society, we should aggressively target the people at the
periphery with interventions to repair their social networks. By helping them,



we can create a protective barrier against loneliness that will keep the whole
network from unraveling.

Feeling in Love

The psychology of emotions such as happiness and loneliness sheds light on
the formation and dissolution of ties in social networks. In fact, human
sensibilities such as anger, sadness, grief, and love all operate in the service
of social ties. One can be angry at nature or saddened by a forest fire or love
a pet, but these emotions have their origin and find their fullest expression in
the anger, sadness, or love one feels in the setting of interpersonal
relationships.

People the world over have different ideas, beliefs, and opinions—
different thoughts—but they have very similar, if not identical, feelings. And
they have similar responses to feelings in others, preferring happy friends to
depressed ones, kind friends to mean ones, and loving friends to violent ones.
A whole range of emotions can spread, from anger and hatred to anxiety and
fear to happiness and loneliness. But there is one emotion central to human
experience that we have not yet considered and that is key to understanding
social connection: love.

The psychology of love and affection is obviously crucial to an
understanding of the formation of social ties between people. As
anthropologist Helen Fisher has argued, the sensibility of being in love may
be broken down into lust, love, and attachment, all of which likely served
evolutionary purposes. 34 The feeling of lust has the obvious goal of driving
reproduction—with almost any partner. The feeling of romantic love is
something different, of course, and tends to be focused on a particular
partner, or at least one partner at a time. From an evolutionary perspective,
this allows the individual to conserve precious resources and not waste them
in the pursuit of several objects of affection. The feeling of attachment, and
the secure tie to another person that it represents, may have evolved to allow
parents to jointly care for their young, which also has evolutionary
advantages.

In chapter 7, we will discuss the role of natural selection in human social



networks in more detail, but before we get there it is important to think about
the implications of our deepest connections. Aside from the evolutionary
advantages and disadvantages, feelings of lust, love, and attachment carry
enormous implications for the way we connect to others. The object of one’s
affection becomes the “center of one’s universe,” around which all else
revolves. People experience intrusive thoughts about their beloved,
aggrandize their beloved, are energized by their beloved, and are obviously
deeply connected to their beloved. We usually experience such romantic love
with just one person at a time. So romantic love does not determine the
general organization of social networks. After all, we do not love everyone
we know. And the love we have for our parents, children, siblings, and other
relations is a different kind of feeling. Yet, as we will see in the next chapter,
being in love is a key mechanism by which certain important social ties are
formed, and it is therefore highly relevant to the origin—and function—of
social networks.