chapter  8 

 sociality  through 
social  network  sites  
 n icole  b .  e llison and  d anah  m .  b oyd 

 Introduction 

 The global system of networked computers, servers, and routers known as the Internet 
has transformed many aspects of modern society and social interaction. The online 
 distribution of goods and services, for instance, has influenced almost every industry 
and has radically transformed many. Alongside commerce-oriented technological 
development has been a rise in what has been termed “social media.” One of the most 
significant developments connected to social media is the rise of social network sites 
(SNSs) such as Facebook, LinkedIn, MySpace, Cyworld, and Google Plus. Although sites 
of this nature first emerged around 1997, they rose to cultural significance as a 
 phenomenon in 2003, when Friendster first attracted mass media attention. Less than a 
decade later, millions of people of all ages across the globe have joined SNSs  (Anderson 
and Bernoff  2010 ) . In the US, 65 percent of Internet-using US adults report using social 
network sites such as Facebook, MySpace, or LinkedIn  (Madden and Zickuhr  2011 ) . 

 In the early stages of this phenomenon, terminology varied widely with the inter-
changeable use of “social networking sites,” “online social networks,” or even simply, 
“social networks” to refer to a diffuse—and sometimes improbable—range of sites and 
services. In  boyd and Ellison ( 2007 ), we attempted to stabilize the discussion by offering 
a definition of social network sites:

 web-based services that allow individuals to (1) construct a public or semi-public 
profile within a bounded system, (2) articulate a list of other users with whom they 
share a connection, and (3) view and traverse their list of connections and those 
made by others within the system. 

 This definition served a need, but the social and technical landscape of these sites has 
changed dramatically since then. In this chapter, we document some of the ways 



152   the oxford handbook of internet studies

SNSs have evolved since 2007, place their evolution within a context of Web 2.0 
and scholarship on computer-mediated communication, and discuss some of the 
opportunities and challenges embedded in the study of social media and social net-
work sites. 

 As SNSs proliferate and evolve, defining what constitutes a social network site 
becomes increasingly challenging. Some of the features that initially distinguished 
them have faded in significance, while others have been reproduced by other genres of 
social media. Media-sharing websites, gaming sites, and locative media all encourage 
participants to list contacts and “Friends,” making this affordance a poor criterion for 
distinguishing between social network sites and other genres. Meanwhile, other 
 features, such as media streams like Facebook’s “News Feed,” have emerged as more 
salient components of the SNS user experience. Blurring things further, open applica-
tion programming interfaces (APIs) and other platform technologies have enabled 
countless third-party websites to develop on top of social network sites or to integrate 
the social graph from popular social network sites into other tools and sites. Search 
engines and news sites surface Facebook and Twitter content, while MySpace allows 
people to use their Facebook credentials on MySpace, blurring the distinction between 
the two sites. In short, the technical affordances that define a social network site have 
become increasingly fluid. Of course, people’s practices, expectations, and social 
norms have also  co-evolved alongside the technical features and social interaction 
opportunities. 

 Scholars face a unique challenge in trying to investigate this rapidly moving phenom-
enon, as they struggle to understand people’s practices while the very systems through 
which they are enacted shift. Even efforts to describe social network sites themselves are 
challenged by the ongoing evolution of the phenomenon. While scholars conscien-
tiously describe  who they are studying, they are less likely to describe the state of the 
technology at the particular moment in which they are studying it. As we will argue 
later, this compromises scholars’ ability to synthesize different studies and discern 
higher order patterns. 

 In this chapter, we begin by reconsidering how to define a social network site given 
the shifts in technology and practice. We examine the three primary features—profiles, 
connection lists, and traversing—and offer an alternate definition that we believe will 
provide a more useful analytic framework for interpreting and understanding social 
network sites as they have evolved, fully recognizing that things may continue to shift in 
unexpected ways. To more properly contextualize social network sites, we situate them 
within the broader landscapes of the entrepreneurial tech scene of “Web 2.0” and the 
evolution of computer-mediated communication (CMC) scholarship. We conclude by 
discussing the opportunities and challenges associated with research on social network 
sites, arguing that researchers must attend to both the technical and the social compo-
nents of these socio-technical systems when they design and report their work. In sum, 
this chapter examines how the genre of social network sites has evolved over time and 
offers thoughts on how scholarship might adapt to the rapid rate of innovation inherent 
in this space. 



sociality through social network sites   153

 The origins and rapid evolution 
of social network sites 

 In 2007, the three defining features of a social network site appeared to be the profile, the 
connections lists, and the functional ability to traverse those connections. As social 
 network sites have evolved, the salience of these features has shifted. Most notably, the 
role of the profile has changed, as media streams have increasingly taken a more prom-
inent role and the activity of “updating” has become less burdensome. Meanwhile, the 
articulation of contacts has become more central, both because of the rise of media 
streams and because of third-party technologies that incorporate the “social graph” as a 
way of organizing content. In contrast, the act of traversing did not change from a 
 technical perspective, but became less central over time. 

 A public or semi-public profile 
 Lacking visible bodies, self-representation in online spaces offers participants many 
possibilities to actively construct a representation of how they would like to be identi-
fied. In some contexts, an online identity is explicitly linked to an offline presence—for 
instance, online dating profiles represent a person who is, presumably, available for 
future offline interactions (Ellison et al. 2012). In other contexts, the linkage to an offline 
presence is less salient. For instance, the reputation associated with a particular pseudo-
nym on an online discussion site may exist independently of the offline identity  (Donath 
 1998 ) . Yet, in all cases, making oneself visible to others requires the enactment of a dig-
ital identity. Most CMC services encourage participants to create a screen name or use 
another identifier—such as an email address—to uniquely identify themselves. Early 
on, chatrooms and bulletin boards introduced the notion of a profile, linking personal 
information provided by individuals to their screen name. Profiles grew out of earlier 
UNIX-based protocols where users entered information into .project and .plan files that 
were displayed when others ran a “finger” command on them. With the rise of the World 
Wide Web, homepages became an important site of identification, as early web users 
posted biographies, photos, and entertaining links for viewers who surfed to their page 
 (Döring  2002 ) . Online communities and related genres of CMC began incorporating 
profiles into their services. Profiles were especially important for sites that were designed 
to broker offline relationships among members, such as online dating sites; users of these 
sites were typically invited to upload photos and fill out detailed questionnaires that 
included demographic information, interests, and open-ended spaces for self-
description. 

 Early social network sites like Friendster were designed with dating in mind and were 
thus profile-centric in nature, organized explicitly around a set of profiles that represented 
individuals within the system. Friendster’s profiles closely resembled those typically 



154   the oxford handbook of internet studies

found in online dating sites and included options for uploading a profile photograph and 
fields for self-descriptive text. Early social network sites generally adopted this same 
 profile format, with two notable differences. Unlike online dating profiles, SNS profiles 
included a Friends list, consisting of names and photos representing a subset of the user’s 
connections (e.g. MySpace’s “Top 8”) and a public space for visitor-supplied comments 
(e.g. “Testimonials” on Friendster or the “Wall” on Facebook). 

 The first SNS profiles were primarily designed to be relatively static portraits, explicitly 
constructed through text and other media provided by the profile owner, and only 
updated when the individual felt the need to do so. Yet, because of the Friends list and 
comments section, SNS profiles were often updated simply through the actions of 
 others—a change in a Friend’s photograph or a new “Testimonial” would alter the con-
tent on that individual’s profile. Because social network site profiles are located within a 
web of relationships and those relationships are made visible on profiles, social network 
site profiles are  co-constructed . Current SNS profiles increasingly include multiple chan-
nels through which individuals can contribute to and shape the profiles of their Friends. 

 In 2007, two types of SNSs were dominant: profile-centric sites, like LinkedIn and 
MySpace, and media-centric sites like LiveJournal, Flickr, and YouTube. A third type of 
SNS—location-focused services like Dodgeball—were still primarily the domain of 
early adopters in urban centers. While media-centric sites also included profiles, profiles 
were de-emphasized as destinations; rather, the structure of these sites highlighted the 
most recently updated content. While many contemporary location-based services like 
Foursquare and Gowalla technically have profiles, they are very rarely accessed. As social 
network sites matured as a genre, profiles simultaneously lost their centrality and also 
became the product of aggregated media, personal updates, and system-generated 
 content based on user activity. 

 Over time, SNSs introduced various features that made it possible for individuals to 
easily update their profiles. Although present in the beginning, commenting became 
more central with the rise of media sharing and the popularization of updating. 
Facebook’s “status updates,” Twitter’s “tweets,” and MySpace’s “status and mood” are all 
examples of opportunities that SNSs provide to encourage users to create content to 
share with their contacts in response to prompts like “[username] is …,” “Tell your 
friends what you are doing right now”, or “What are you doing right now?” As the cost of 
storing photos and videos declined, SNSs also began to support large-scale media shar-
ing; mobile applications made posting photographs and videos easy. Features that made 
it easier for users to post lightweight content to their profiles while simultaneously shar-
ing it with Friends enhanced profiles by making them more dynamic, but in the process 
made the basic profile increasingly irrelevant as a destination. 

 Over time, the profile has shifted from a self-presentational message created by the 
individual to a portrait of an individual as an expression of action, a node in a series of 
groups, and a repository of self- and other-provided data. This combats one of the cen-
tral problems that emerged with social network site profiles—they grew stale and, as 
such, started to resemble an abandoned space. In some ways, by 2011 sites like Friendster 
felt like a dormant snapshot of 2003, a collection of portraits that had been left unaltered 



sociality through social network sites   155

since users abandoned the site for more vibrant spaces. Streams of quotidian, ephemeral 
content encourage people to participate more in that they provide an initial artifact 
around which others can engage. Features that support actions associated with status 
updates—the ability to post comments to, share, or register interest in an update—also 
encourage a stream of activity that is prompted by an update but often takes on a life of 
its own in the central stream. Today’s SNSs are more like news aggregators than they 
are like profile-based contexts, even if the algorithm for displaying content is quite 
obfuscated. On some SNSs, a user’s “profile” might consist solely of their activities on the 
site (such as media they have contributed) and list of contacts, with none of the user-
supplied biographical data associated with traditional profiles. 

 Today’s profiles are not simply self-descriptive, static text, but rather a dynamic com-
bination of content provided by the user (such as status updates), activity reports (such as 
groups they’ve joined), content provided by others (such as virtual gifts that are displayed 
on the profile or “tagged” photographs uploaded by others), and/or system-provided 
content (such as a subset of one’s Friend network and activities on third-party sites.) 

 The “Friends” list 
 The ability to delineate someone as a public contact—or “Friend”1  —and thus create an 
aggregated list that constitutes one’s network on the site is the key differentiating feature 
of SNSs. Earlier communication tools enabled individuals to create a private list of con-
tacts (for instance a buddy list on instant messaging), to establish a group of contacts 
that were shared by others (such as a listserv membership list), or to publish a list of 
related links (such as a blogroll), but SNSs extended the practice of creating a publicly 
visible, personally curated list of contacts and made it a mainstream practice. 

 The connections between people—and, thus, profiles—serve multiple purposes on a 
social network site. They are employed to mark and display relationships, delineate who 
can access what content, and serve as a filter through which viewers can browse profiles 
and discover friends in common. For users, these connections represent what sociolo-
gists refer to as a person’s social network —the collection of social relations of varying 
strengths and importance that a person maintains. 

 Friending practices are at the core of SNS activity, but are often misunderstood by 
popular press narratives that assume that because these sites use a global term, users are 
unable to distinguish among kinds of relationships in their circle. An early study noted 
that the global label of “Friends” may have introduced confusion among users: “it is 
often difficult for two users who both call each other a friend to know if they are talking 
about the same thing”  (Fono and Raynes-Goldie  2006 ) . Yet, there is no evidence that 
SNS users are unable to distinguish different kinds of relationships within their SNS 

 1 We capitalize Friends when we are referring to the connections on a SNS in order to differentiate 
these connections from the colloquial reference to friendship. When people use SNSs, they often 
identify friends, acquaintances, celebrities, and many others as “Friends”  (Parks  2010 ) . 



156   the oxford handbook of internet studies

 network. When asked, users report about 25–30 percent of their total Facebook Friends 
are “actual” friends  (Ellison et al.  2011a ;  Ellison et al.  2011b ) , suggesting that users are in 
fact able to discern between these relationships although they all use the same label on 
the SNS. 

 Initially, SNS “Friends lists” were predominantly reciprocal, meaning that a link 
between two people was only instantiated when both parties agreed. As Twitter grew 
popular, so did the notion that relationships could be uni-directional, with people 
 following others who did not reciprocate. Google Plus launched with directed connec-
tions and, in 2011, Facebook began to allow people to “subscribe” to others. Even for sys-
tems in which reciprocal friendship links are necessary, the ability to “hide” updates 
from a Friend or to limit the ability of some Friends to see updates allows for more asym-
metrical disclosure of information. These more flexible arrangements may give users 
more freedom to express complex connections, but the tools to negotiate these relation-
ships are often too complicated to be truly usable. 

 In offline contexts, we maintain many different kinds of relationships, ranging from 
weak ties to strong connections, which exist in multiple contexts such as work, family, 
and hobby or school-based groups. Having to simultaneously present oneself to different 
groups in the same social encounter can be challenging and predates the Internet 
 (Meyrowitz  1985 ;  Leary  1995 ) . As SNSs became more popular with a wider range of indi-
viduals, many individuals’ contact lists became more diverse as these users Friended 
people representing a range of contexts (family, professional contacts, church members, 
etc.). This growing diversity has contributed to cases of “context collapse,” which 
describes the ways in which individuals that we know from different social contexts 
come together in SNSs in potentially uncomfortable ways  (Marwick and boyd  2011 ) . 
Over time, the size of users’ Friends lists has grown, in part because SNS users don’t tend 
to delete old connections, even if they lose touch with those people. 

 Social network site designers have developed different approaches to help people 
manage large networks. MySpace introduced the “Top 8” (eventually relabeled “Top 
Friends”) to allow participants to choose eight contacts that would be highlighted on 
their profile page; MySpace assumed that people would list the people whose profiles 
they visited the most often, but this feature was often used to publicly display important 
connections. Facebook took a more algorithmic approach, attempting to assess the 
importance of a user’s Friends in order to prioritize updates, but allowing users to tweak 
these formulae by “hiding” certain kinds of content in their news stream. Some SNSs—
including Facebook, Twitter, Google Plus, and YouTube—have allowed people to create 
different types of lists to organize their connections privately so that participants can 
consume only content from or limit content to people on those lists. Google Plus allows 
users to place others into “circles” as a way of organizing incoming and outgoing content 
and does not require symmetrical linking. 

 The rise of open APIs and developer platforms meant that these collections of articu-
lated contacts became valuable in contexts outside that particular SNS. Engineers and 
entrepreneurs alike began talking about the “social graph”—the global network of linkages 
between all individuals within a system  (Fitzpatrick and Recordon  2007 ) . This language 
emerged at a time when commercial entities began to believe that the social graph had 



sociality through social network sites   157

value beyond the individual’s relationship with a given social network site. Marketers 
started recognizing the economic potential of using the social graph for advertising 
 purposes, while media companies realized that they could leverage the social graph to 
shape the flow of information. From an engineering perspective, user experience design-
ers recognized that the more accurately a system could discern the relationship between 
two users, the more valuable its recommendations would be and the more relevant the 
content displayed to the user. 

 As the social graph has risen in significance, companies have begun leveraging it to 
do more complex algorithmic work, such as suggest relevant content, offer recom-
mended contacts, and provide targeted advertisements. At a broader industry level, 
SNSs are metamorphosing from a destination site to a platform that enables third-party 
developers to build software on top of the social graph. Companies have begun exposing 
the social graph through APIs and negotiating deals to help connect information with 
people through their relationships.2  For example, technologies like “Facebook Connect” 
allow other websites to suggest unique content based on a person’s Facebook Friends 
list. In this way, the social graph of SNSs is increasingly used beyond the bounded space 
of the SNS itself. 

 View and traverse connections 
 When people first flocked to SNSs, the ability to traverse one’s own connections and those 
of others was a critical and defining component of SNSs. Yet, as profiles faded, media 
streams emerged, Friends lists became more infrastructural; traversing connections has 
lost its salience as the core participation activity. The ability to see—and traverse—others’ 
contact lists was innovative and important in several ways. From an adoption perspec-
tive, it enabled users to find shared contacts easily, thus lowering the barriers to initiating 
contact with other users and enabling users to harness network effects more easily. From 
a social perspective, it allowed people to easily see the relationships between others, to 
reconnect with old friends and acquaintances, and to travel through the network in a way 
that enhanced social interactions. Although some SNSs may enable users to hide por-
tions of their network, the critical point here is that the design of the site makes it possible 
to display one’s articulated network and that this is the default and typical setting. 

 Prior to social network sites, the closest analog to the traversable Friends list was the 
construction of blogrolls on blogs. Individual bloggers often listed other sites that they 
respected, providing an HTML link pointing to them. This allowed visitors on Blog A to 
surf to Blog B. The flow of information was unilateral, though, so visitors who stumbled 
upon Blog B were unable to see that Blog A recommended Blog B. This was because 
 blogrolls were, by and large, manually inserted and maintained, and the structure of many 
blog platforms did not support display of this information. Services like LiveJournal and 

 2 Google, Facebook, and Twitter all provide APIs that allow third parties to leverage the social 
graph. Conferences like O’Reilly’s Strata connect people who are working with the kinds of data 
provided by these APIs, and books like  Russell ( 2011 ) provide technical guidance for engineers. 



158   the oxford handbook of internet studies

Xanga—retrospectively viewable as a cross between blog platforms and SNSs—were 
some of the first services to make traversing the network possible. 

 The visibility and traversability of connections through articulated tie lists of “Friends” 
or “Followers” is still common on SNSs, and has become an assumed property of pub-
licly accessible Friends lists. Yet, one  significant shift has unfolded: the traversability of 
connections has become more important for machines than users. As APIs make the 
social graph available to broader audiences, algorithms are being designed to traverse 
the graph and learn about the individual nodes’ relationship to one another. Such 
machine learning is the backbone of search engine technology, but it is increasingly cen-
tral to the development of social  network sites. 

 As social network sites have become mainstream, traversing the connections between 
people to view profiles is no longer the sole—or, even primary—way of participation. 
Content is surfaced through streams, and each piece of content is embedded with 
numerous links to other content nuggets. While early iterations of sites like Friendster 
allowed users to browse interests to find other people, more recent SNSs have evolved 
to make nearly everything traversable. Features like Twitter’s “hashtags” allow people 
to pivot off of topics: clicking on a hashtag will reveal all other posts referencing that 
term. On Facebook, the vast majority of profile content has become clickable, allowing 
people to traverse everything from alma mater to tagged content. Although early social 
network sites provided numerous points of navigation, Friends lists were the most notable; 
today, they have faded into the background as sites increasingly offer countless alternate 
discovery pathways. 

 Definition 2.0 

 Given the evolution of social network sites—and the importance of these sites in popu-
lar culture—it is important to reconsider how to define them. The definition that we 
offered in 2007, while useful, does not accurately describe the landscape of SNSs today. 
As of this writing, we believe the following is a more accurate and nuanced definition:

 A social network site is a networked communication platform in which participants 
1) have  uniquely identifiable profiles that consist of user-supplied content, content 
provided by other users, and/or system-level data; 2) can publicly articulate connec-
tions that can be viewed and traversed by others; and 3) can consume, produce, and/
or interact with streams of user-generated content provided by their connections on 
the site. 

 We still believe the term “social network sites” is more accurate than “social networks” 
(which is a sociological term for one’s social relationships), “social networking” (which 
evokes a practice of actively seeking connections and also happens offline), “online 
social networks” (one’s online connections more generally), or “social networking sites” 
(which emphasizes connecting to new people). The term “social network site” rightfully 



sociality through social network sites   159

emphasizes that these are sites that enable individuals to articulate public lists of 
 connections—to present a social network and to view others’ networks. This ability is 
what differentiates social network sites from earlier forms of online interaction spaces 
and the term “social network site” highlights the role of the network (as a noun) as 
opposed to the practice of networking (as a verb). 

 The desire to communicate and share content is a primary driver of SNS use. These 
interactions are supported through a variety of communication-oriented features. 
Almost every aspect of SNS user activity is fundamentally enhanced by the ability of 
SNSs to lower the barriers to communication and sharing and thus reshape the kinds of 
networks that people are able to build and support. Many of the weak tie relationships 
articulated on SNSs would fade away were it not for the ease with which people can 
communicate, share, and maintain simple connections. For this reason, this new defini-
tion positions social network sites first and foremost as a communication platform, 
while also highlighting the importance of sharing content, typically consumed through 
a stream. 

 All SNSs support multiple modes of communication: one-to-many and one-to-one, 
synchronous and asynchronous, textual and media-based. On most social network sites, 
these features can be public or more private. Features like comments on Facebook, @
replies on Twitter, and shouts on Foursquare allow people to communicate with their 
network of Friends in ways that are visible to broad audiences. Meanwhile, many SNSs 
have private messaging or chat features that allow for more intimate dialogue. 
Importantly, through features such as the ability to comment on Friends’ content or 
social gaming, users are able to communicate with the networks of their Friends. These 
Friends of Friends may be useful sources of novel information and diverse perspectives. 
The context of the SNS—such as the fact that these users share a Friend in common and 
are communicating in a semi-public forum—may support more productive exchanges 
than those that take place in other online fora such as anonymous chat rooms where 
accountability and motivation are lower. 

 As part of a broader shift echoed in other social media, SNSs have become more 
media-centric and less profile-centric. By 2011, most social network sites were organized 
around a stream of recently updated content, whether in the form of Facebook’s News 
Feed or as the landing page on Twitter and Tumblr. Naaman, Boase, and Lai (2010) refer 
to these streams as “social awareness streams.” On most social network sites, each per-
son’s stream is populated with content provided by those whom they’ve chosen to Friend 
or follow. Spaces for media sharing—whether text, video, or photos—are also nearly 
universal on popular social network sites; the availability of this content is often 
announced in the stream of updates. On some sites, automated messages about people’s 
actions on the site are also posted in the stream. The aggregated collection of media and 
text from one’s Friends serves as the point of departure for other activities on the site or 
the Web, replacing the act of surfing from profile to profile to discover updated content. 

 Social network sites have evolved, but their foundational activities—sharing content 
with a bounded group of users—are fundamentally the same. The significance of profiles 
in the user experience has declined, but profiles as spaces for self-presentation and 



160   the oxford handbook of internet studies

 content distribution are still the anchor of social network sites. Friends lists are still the 
core organizing principle, but have gone from being a way of knitting together profiles to 
becoming the “social graph” backbone. Most importantly, the implicit role of communi-
cation and information sharing has become the driving motivator for participation. 

 Situating social network sites 
in context 

 In essence, social network sites are a computer-mediated communication (CMC) genre 
that emerged during an industry-wide innovation boom referred to as the “Web 2.0” 
phenomenon, and thus is part of a category of tools referred to as “social media.” In 
order to understand the significance of SNSs and the practices that unfolded around 
them, it is important to contextualize them against the backdrop of Web 2.0 and situate 
them within the framework of CMC scholarship more generally. 

 The Web 2.0 phenomenon 
 When Friendster first gained widespread attention in 2003—prompting numerous 
 imitators—social network sites were quickly labeled as one type of “social software” in 
what would be later described as the “Web 2.0” phenomenon. While many scholars have 
eschewed these labels, arguing that there’s nothing about “social software” that couldn’t 
be addressed through existing academic frames such as “virtual communities” or “com-
puter-supported cooperative work,” many in Silicon Valley were enamored by the poten-
tial of this new wave of innovation. 

 Functionally speaking, there was very little new about social software—or, as the 
technologies would later be called, “social media.” Many of the prominent features, 
such as the ability to host photographs online or the ability to update a web page, had 
existed for years. What makes “social media” significant as a category is not the tech-
nology, but rather the socio-technical dynamics that unfolded as millions of people 
embraced the technology and used it to collaborate, share information, and socialize. 
Popular genres of social media integrated the public nature of interest-driven CMC 
with the more intimate dynamics of interpersonal CMC. For instance, news aggrega-
tor sites like Reddit and Digg enable individuals to post links to news stories online 
as well as comment and vote on them, reshaping the economics of attention in a way 
that enabled bottom-up filtering of online content. Meanwhile, SNSs have become a 
genre of social media that lowers barriers to communication, facilitates the display of 
identity information, and enables like-minded individuals to easily discern their 
common ground, thus helping users cultivate socially relevant interactions  (Ellison 
et al.  2011a ) . 



sociality through social network sites   161

 Web 2.0 means different things to different people. Tim O’Reilly is usually credited 
with popularizing the term, although the moniker dates back to the 1990s. In organizing 
the first Web 2.0 conference, O’Reilly and John Battelle sought to discuss how the Web 
could serve as a platform  (O’Reilly  2005 ) . Their approach paralleled how technologists 
and entrepreneurs generally viewed Web 2.0. 

 At a technical level, Web 2.0 signaled a shift from server-driven back-end websites to 
front-end centric ones powered by Javascript, Ruby on Rails, and other web develop-
ment packages. Procedurally, Web 2.0 meant moving from a model of “design, develop, 
and deploy” to an iterative development process known as the “perpetual beta.” 
MySpace’s approach to development illustrates this mindset. In the early years of the 
site, MySpace launched new features frequently based on watching what people did with 
the service, eschewing traditional in-house quality control and instead relying on users 
to indicate what was working and what wasn’t, what they liked and what they didn’t. 

 For the business community, Web 2.0 represented a potential return to the irrational 
exuberance of the dot com boom. In many ways, the “2.0” moniker refers to the poten-
tial for Silicon Valley to recover from the collapse of the first Web-related boom. As such, 
Web 2.0 signaled a return of venture capitalists, entrepreneurs, and a new battle over 
power and status in the technology scene  (Marwick  2010 ) . 

 While the technical and business aspects of Web 2.0 are significant in and of them-
selves, more germane to this discussion are the cultural shifts that came with Web 2.0. 
In short, Web 2.0 brought online communities into the mainstream. Although online 
communities have been in existence since the earliest days of the internet—and 
 services like AOL made online communities accessible to more mainstream internet 
users—they have not been the central focus of most internet users. Prior to Web 2.0, 
people spent the bulk of their time online browsing websites and engaging with email, 
instant messaging, and casual gaming; actively participating in online communities 
was still considered geeky. Social network sites reconfigured people’s engagement with 
online communities because they signaled a shift from interest-driven to friendship-
driven spaces. Rather than going to an online community to meet others who were 
interested in a particular topic or hobby, people primarily turned to social network 
sites like Facebook to publicly engage with people they already knew  (Ellison et al. 
 2007 ,  2011a ) . The focus on one’s personal network and the familiarity between partici-
pants made social media feel very different than previous varieties of online 
communities. 

 The concept of “Web 2.0” was an industry-driven phenomenon, hyped by the news 
media and by business analysts alike. Many of the technologies that were eventually 
labeled Web 2.0 were developed years earlier. For example, the structural foundations of 
blogging were first created during the dot com bubble with services like LiveJournal and 
Blogger, both founded in 1999. Still, blogging started rising out of the post-crash ashes 
circa 2003 and, in 2004, the US presidential election took blogging mainstream and 
news agencies began critiquing the role that “web diarists” could play as amateur jour-
nalists  (Lee  2004 ) . Likewise, the functional components of social network sites date back 
to at least 1997, but Friendster got people excited in part because it was seen as a new type 



162   the oxford handbook of internet studies

of online dating site, and online dating sites were one of the few profitable services in 
2001, after the economic downturn. 

 Web 1.0 veterans—bored, out of work, and still enamored by the Internet, which, at 
the time, was being described as a “fad” by analysts—began developing new applications 
for communicating and sharing information. People were exploring blogging, tagging, 
social bookmarking, podcasting, photo sharing, video sharing, and social gaming. Old 
CMC tools were being revisited and reconsidered while the industry itself began  making 
claims about innovation that excited investors. For example, buzzwords like “user-generated 
content” became widespread in order to signal a shift from commercially edited or 
curated content to content provided by individuals. Social network sites emerged out of 
the Web 2.0 and social media phenomena, mixing new technologies and older CMC 
practices infused by tech industry ideals. 

 Genres of computer-mediated communication 
 SNS-enabled communication patterns both differ from and incorporate aspects of ear-
lier forms of online communication, including email, instant messaging, and MUDs. 
While SNSs emerged at a moment in the Internet’s history where mediated interactions 
were increasingly widespread, in part because the Internet was being broadly embraced, 
they owe a lot to earlier CMC genres. In fact, many SNS features were incorporated from 
earlier tools. Although the true historical origins of CMC are found in the introduction 
of print, which enabled communication to span temporal and geographical boundaries 
for the first time, the first instances of computer -mediated communication are located in 
the exchange of text messages over the Internet which occurred soon after the first file 
transfers over ARPANET and quickly constituted the majority of the system’s traffic. 
Since these early exchanges, the ability of the Internet to support social interaction has 
played a central role in its adoption. 

 Early CMC genres can typically be understood across two axes: synchronous versus 
asynchronous, one-to-one versus one-to-many. One-to-one CMC channels were primarily 
for connecting people directly in more intimate fashions, while one-to-many channels 
connected strangers, typically around shared interests. For instance, motorcycles aficio-
nados went to Usenet’s rec.motorcycles to find like-minded communication partners, 
while close friends often communicated via IM or email. The tools for interpersonal 
group communication and the tools for topically-oriented gatherings often blurred, 
with mailing lists serving both as a forum for groups of people who knew each other and 
as places where strangers could gather around a topic. Likewise, some channels blurred 
synchronous and asynchronous communication, such as MUDs—environments where 
users created fantastical representations of self and communicated with others in 
 text-based environments. 

 While groups of friends often met at collectively agreed-upon online spaces—and 
online communities like the Whole Earth ’Lectronic Link (WELL) initially formed 
through networks of friends—many online communities in the 90s were not designed to 



sociality through social network sites   163

support pre-existing friend groups. Rather, they served as interest-focused conversational 
hubs that brought together people based on shared interests—not just shared geography—
and enabled them to “form webs of personal relationships in cyberspace”  (Rheingold 
 1993 ) . This first generation of virtual communities was, for the most part, built upon 
people encountering one another for the first time in an online context that grouped 
 people by interest, not geography. Some of these relationships moved to other communi-
cation channels, including face-to-face  (Parks and Floyd  1996 ) , especially when they were 
associated with a particular geographical nexus (such as the WELL in the Bay Area of 
California). Later work found similar patterns: DiGennaro and Dutton (2007) find that 
20 percent of their sample of Internet users report meeting new friends online and  Tufekci 
( 2010 ) reports that people who are looking to make friends online often do. 

 Early research on virtual communities explored how these collections of individuals 
transformed into communities with distinctive cultures, norms, and a sense of connection. 
For instance,  Nancy Baym’s ( 2000 ) ethnographic account of a newsgroup devoted to 
soap operas highlights the shared norms that developed among participants as they 
 created a space for communication and community. Rheingold ( 1993 ) documented the 
development of the WELL and coined the phrase “virtual community.”  Sherry Turkle’s 
( 1995 ) analysis of MUDs described a space where interactions that occurred outside of 
traditional embodied experiences were heady and liberating. As one of Turkle’s partici-
pants explains, “[real life] is just one more window, and it’s not usually my best one” 
 (Turkle  1995 : 13). 

 The notion that individuals could develop intimate friendships and emotional con-
nections with people they had never met “in real life” was surprising to those who didn’t 
use these tools, and some of the early laboratory studies reinforced the notion that CMC 
was less effective than face-to-face for group communication processes (e.g.  Kiesler
et al.  1984 ) . Although the hundreds of listservs and newsgroups that flourished during 
this time reflected a diverse set of interests, the user base powering them was far less 
diverse. During this period, the typical Internet user was more likely to be white, male, 
tech-savvy, older, and wealthier than those who were not online. And most of them 
spoke English and were passionate about geeky topics. Thus, even as strangers encoun-
tered each other online, they often had quite a lot in common. 

 Many of the features underlying early CMC tools have been incorporated into SNSs. 
Being able to group users by interest, describe oneself textually, and engage in both syn-
chronous and asynchronous communication are key aspects of the SNS user experience 
today. As with these earlier communication forums, individuals are using SNSs to 
achieve a multitude of personal and professional goals. 

 Early research on the topic suggested that SNS users were more likely to articulate 
existing relationships on social network sites than meet new people (see  boyd and 
Ellison  2007 , for a review). Recent research on Facebook suggests that connecting with 
close friends is more common than using the site to meet new people, but that using the 
site to find out more information about peripheral others, such as casual acquaintances 
or someone one has met socially, is also a strategy employed by users  (Ellison et al.  2011a ; 
 Joinson  2008 ) . On other sites, different practices have evolved. Early research on the 



164   the oxford handbook of internet studies

topic found that MySpace users appeared more likely than Facebook users to meet new 
people  (Dwyer et al.  2007 ) . On Twitter, which allows asymmetrical relationships, it is 
more common to follow accounts of those whom one does not know personally 
 (Marwick and boyd  2011 ) , reconfiguring how connection and intimacy are managed 
 (Crawford  2009 ) . 

 The infrastructure behind social network sites—particularly the articulation and 
navigation of preexisting relationships—also complicates how “community” can be 
conceptualized. While online forums that are organized around topic or interests can be 
reasonably understood as a discrete group, networks of people connected to disparate 
others are not as easy to categorize. Similar to the way in which early users might belong 
to multiple discussion forums—each with its own culture, norms, and history—SNS 
users may interact with different groups that they see as communities on SNSs. For 
instance, a college student may have Friends that include fraternity brothers, chemistry 
major friends, high school friends and family members. While there are tools for seg-
menting these individuals into lists for the purposes of sharing and restricting content, 
these features are often challenging to use. 3 Instead, individuals are recreating their com-
munities on an individual basis as opposed to accessing a commonly held distribution 
list, as is typical in many other forms of online interaction.  Rainie and Wellman ( 2012 ) 
point out that, in networked societies, we are likely to connect with multiple shifting 
networks that meet our informational or other needs at that moment, as opposed to a 
smaller number of static groups that serve all our needs. 

 SNSs incorporate features from earlier forms of CMC, but they do so in a way that 
amplifies the power of these features because they are placed in a social context. For 
instance, consider the profile. Profiles that are linked to a group of contacts are often 
more accurate than those that exist in a social vacuum; the presence of these contacts 
implicitly vets presentational claims, and third-party comments are perceived as more 
credible than self-reported information  (Walther et al.  2008 ) . In this way, people’s self-
presentations on social network sites may be less highly embellished when compared to 
sites without visible social connections, such as online dating sites. Earlier forms of 
mediated communication allow for identity information to be shared, but SNSs do this 
in different and potentially more powerful ways due to the presence of the third-party 
Friends network. Other features are similarly amplified through the Friends list. One 
reason SNSs are a compelling focus for the field of CMC is that they are well-designed to 
support interaction and are adopted by so many diverse kinds of individuals who are 
connecting with one another in novel ways, leveraging existing tools to do unexpected 
things, and reconfiguring CMC technologies to meet their needs. Much of what is novel 
stems from how participants incorporate an articulated list of connections—or 
Friends—into their online practices. 

 3 Google Plus attempts to address this design issue with its “Circles” but, at the time of publication, 
patterns of use have not yet stabilized. 



sociality through social network sites   165

 Research challenges 

 SNS scholarship offers scholars in a diverse range of fields the opportunity to study empirical 
questions as wide-ranging as how the number of Friends one accumulates on an SNS 
affects impressions  (Tong et al.  2008 ) , how participants leverage SNSs to get their ques-
tions answered  (Morris et al.  2010a ,  2010b) , how social media connects journalists and 
citizens during political uprisings  (Lotan et al.  2011 ) , or how constructing one’s profile can 
affect one’s view of self  (Gonzales and Hancock  2008 ) . 4 Arguably, the range of activities 
and goals that users are employing SNSs to meet, and the diversity of the user base, make 
social network sites a relevant context for scholarship in almost every discipline. 

 However, studying SNSs also poses unique challenges. By far the most pressing chal-
lenge for SNS scholars lies in the rapid pace at which innovations and technical changes 
are implemented in this space. For scholarship in this arena to develop, SNS researchers 
need to be mindful of the ways in which these sites evolve over time and the effects this 
may have on the interpersonal, psychological, and sociological processes they are 
studying. 

 The networked nature of SNS interactions provides an additional layer of complexity 
not experienced by earlier media scholars examining the role of television or radio. 
What one experiences on SNSs and the content to which one is exposed differs depend-
ing on the structure of one’s network, a user’s individual preferences and history, and her 
activities at that moment. This is quite unlike previous media like television, where the 
program does not change depending on who can see it. Although interpretations of 
media have always varied, mere access varies widely with SNSs, complicating what con-
stitutes the object of content analysis. 

 Much like research on the effects of Internet use have evolved to measure granular 
activities as opposed to global measures of use such as time online, SNS researchers are 
also moving towards a consideration of specific activities on the site. Because of how 
people’s position within the SNS shapes their experiences of it, activity-centric analyses 
require contextualization and translation, not unlike what social scientists studying dif-
fering cultural practices have had to do for decades. 

Documenting socio-technical changes 
 One key challenge of studying social media is that designers of these tools are innovating 
at a very rapid timeframe and often with little advance notice. Given the rapidly changing 
infrastructure and the timeframe of academic publishing, the site at the time of data 
 collection is likely to be very different from its incarnation at the point of publication. 
Furthermore, features that one scholar examines one year may simply disappear the next. 

 4 For a broader sampling of research into SNSs, visit the following bibliography: < http://www.danah
.org/researchBibs/sns.php >. Accessed June 2, 2011. 



166   the oxford handbook of internet studies

Thus, two studies of a particular site that produce different findings may not be 
“contradictory”—they may actually have examined what are in essence two different 
socio-technical contexts. 

 We believe it is critical that SNS scholars consider the implications of technological 
change more explicitly in their work. As systems change, so will the practices they enable 
and constrain. Unless researchers attend to technology-based features, and are more 
careful about describing and considering the impact of the technology itself, scholarship 
on SNSs may become a landscape of individual, niche studies that preclude synthesis 
across them—a connect-the-dots canvas of points with no organizing framework that 
reveals the connections between them and allows the larger picture to emerge. 

 All technologies evolve over time (see  Pinch and Bijker  1987 ) . As feature sets change, 
so too do user practices, expectations, and norms. Unlike many previous technologies—
like the television or telephone—social media applications evolve far more quickly, often 
without warning and in ways that may have significant implications for users and their 
practices. Social media researchers may be halfway through data collection when they 
discover that an important feature has been redesigned or removed altogether. Or they 
may find their analysis assumes an old set of norms and features. For example, a study of 
manual retweeting practices on Twitter  (boyd et al.  2010 ) quickly became outdated when 
Twitter launched its retweet functionality. In order to study phenomena as they are 
unfolding, researchers must flexibly negotiate the shifting toolset, but they must also be 
careful about how they document their findings. 

 In order to produce scholarship that will be enduring, the onus is on social media 
researchers to describe the technological artifact that they are analyzing with as much 
care as survey researchers take in describing the population sampled, and with as much 
detail as ethnographers use when describing their field site. This is not to say that 
researchers must continue to describe technologies as if no one knows what they are—
we are beyond the point where researchers must explain how electronic mail or “email” 
is like or unlike postal mail. But, rather, researchers must clearly describe the socio-
technical context of the particular site, service, or application their scholarship is 
addressing. In addition to attending to the technology itself, and the interchange 
between technical and social processes, we believe SNS researchers should make a con-
certed effort to include the date of data collection and to describe the site at the moment 
of data collection and the relevant practices of its users. These descriptions will enable 
later researchers to synthesize across studies to identify patterns, much in the same way 
reporting exact effect sizes allows for future meta-analyses. 

 For those of us who believe that social network sites are socio-technical systems, in 
which social and technical factors shape one another, failing to describe the site under 
study ignores the fact that the technological constraints and affordances of a site will 
shape user practices and that social norms will emerge over time. Not including infor-
mation about what the feature set was at the time of data collection forecloses the possi-
bility of identifying patterns that emerge over time and through the accumulated 
scholarship across a range of sites and user samples. Unfortunately, because they have 
no knowledge about how things will continue to evolve and which features will become 



sociality through social network sites   167

important to track, researchers may not be able to identify the salient features to report 
and may struggle with devoting scarce publication space to these details, but this doesn’t 
undermine the importance of conscientious consideration towards describing the arti-
fact being analyzed. 

 Even minute technical changes can have meaningful effects on human behavior. 
For instance, changing the default ages that show up on the front page of major online 
 dating sites for suggested searches might influence how searches are conducted and how 
individuals choose to present themselves. Online daters report shaving off a year or two 
from their age so as to not be “filtered out” by people searching for typical age brackets 
such as 35 or 40  (Ellison et al.  2006 ) . 

 These issues are more magnified when addressing larger socio-technical issues, like 
privacy and the shifting nature of social network site privacy settings. Unlike face-
to-face contexts, where the audience for a particular utterance is usually visible (e.g. the 
other people in the room), content that’s visible to a limited audience can be confusing 
to those who see them but do not know who else can, and thus may not be able to dis-
cern the extent to which the information is truly “public.” For example, scholars who 
were analyzing privacy settings and privacy practices on Facebook in 2005  (Gross and 
Acquisti  2005 ) document very different practices than those who study privacy later 
(e.g.  boyd and Marwick  2011 ;  Lampinen et al.  2011 ;  Stutzman and Kramer-Duffield 
 2010 ) . Seeing how the default privacy settings on Facebook have changed over time 
highlights the rapid and meaningful nature of change on SNSs  (McKeon  2010 ) . The 
introduction of features that enable users to target content to certain people, such as 
Facebook’s “lists” feature and, more recently, Google Plus’s “circles,” are examples of techni-
cal changes that could reshape how users engage with others on the site, and potentially 
force users to negotiate a new level of social complexity. Knowing whether users had 
access to these advanced features or just early simplistic structures for making content 
“public’, “private,” or “Friends-only” is important to know when interpreting findings 
from a study of SNS privacy issues. 

 SNS scholars should aim to produce work that contributes insights and develops 
 theory in a way that transcends the particular site at a moment in time, but rather is useful 
and informative even after the site design shifts. This requires historically locating the 
technology alongside descriptions of the population and practices. 

 The challenges and opportunities of large datasets 
 Because of both the content that people upload and the behavioral traces that they leave 
behind, social network sites have unprecedented quantities of data concerning human 
interaction. This presents unique opportunities and challenges. On one hand, SNSs offer 
a vibrant “living lab” and access to behavioral data at a scale inconceivable to many social 
scientists. On the other, the data that are available present serious research ethics ques-
tions and introduce new types of biases that must be examined  (boyd and Crawford 
 2012 ) . 



168   the oxford handbook of internet studies

 A lot of the core challenges stem from the opportunities, problems, and limitations to 
accessing server-level data. Harnessing server-level data—the data captured by the site, 
not just the traces made visible through the public-facing screens—provides an oppor-
tunity to study and track user behavior without the issues posed by self-report data or 
privacy settings, although it introduces other complications. Server-level data often pro-
vide activity data at a granular level not possible through other methods. For instance, 
using Facebook server-level data, Burke and colleagues are able to identify the social 
capital outcomes of different kinds of activities on the site, such as passively consuming 
others’ content or broadcasting messages  (Burke et al.  2011 ) . The cognitive load required 
of users to answer detailed questions about their micro-activities often precludes survey 
questions about these kinds of usage details, even assuming users could accurately 
report them. 

 Server-level data provide a unique opportunity to access detailed behavioral data 
about what people are doing on SNSs. Yet, it’s not clear that those who participate on 
SNSs want to be observed in this way. Nor is it clear that researchers can always correctly 
interpret these data. Furthermore, only some researchers have access to server-level 
data, which limits the kinds of research questions that are explored. Interpretation 
requires accounting for all of the reasons behind why content may have been produced. 
It’s easy to misinterpret data when researchers can’t directly ask users about their moti-
vations, perceptions, or attitudes. Similarly, self-reported user characteristics in profile 
fields are susceptible to self-presentational tendencies and response biases, so just as 
with survey questions, researchers need to be careful to articulate the biases in their 
samples. Meanwhile, access to these data is difficult to procure, often requiring 
 collaboration with a commercial organization or requiring researchers to create social 
media systems in order to access data. For example, while some researchers have easy 
access to the Twitter “firehose,” many others do not. As Lev  Manovich ( 2011 ) has argued, 
limited access to data may reproduce significant inequalities among researchers and 
limits what kinds of questions are asked. While the research challenges surrounding 
server-level data are not yet well understood or articulated, it is important that scholars 
begin interrogating this aspect of studying SNSs. 

 As more and more attention is given to the large datasets associated with social 
media applications, it is also important for researchers to recognize that many pow-
erful inquiries about SNS practices do not require server-level access or technical 
analyses. Indeed, there is critical research value in understanding how individuals 
interpret the technological artifacts of SNSs or how individuals work to challenge 
expectations about how they are supposed to engage with the systems. Just because a 
system is designed to do something in particular does not mean that users will engage 
with it in that way. For example, Facebook gives users the ability to “deactivate” (as 
opposed to delete) their accounts so that users who regret their decision could reac-
tivate their account without suffering data loss. Yet,  boyd and Marwick ( 2011 ) 
interviewed a teenage girl who repurposed this feature to make Facebook a real-time 
experience for privacy reasons. Every day, she logged into Facebook and reactivated 



sociality through social network sites   169

her account; when she was done, she deactivated her account. Her regular de/re-acti-
vation strategy may have been visible as a glitch in the server logs, but the rationale 
for her behavior would be impossible to discern without direct interrogation of some 
kind. It is important not to lose sight of the kinds of questions that  cannot be answered 
by server-level datasets alone. 

 Conclusion 

 In this chapter, we’ve attempted to highlight changes in social network sites over time 
and to introduce a definition of SNSs that more accurately articulates the features and 
frameworks that are salient to users. We have attempted to outline some of the ways in 
which SNSs have changed since their popularization, drawing attention to the ways in 
which technical and social changes are dependent upon one another. As a genre, SNSs 
are still in their adolescent stage and we expect that they will continue to evolve. By con-
textualizing them in light of the Web 2.0 phenomenon and revealing how they build on 
previous genres of CMC, we have grounded their history so that future developments 
can better be understood in terms of the past. 

 Our definition of social network sites is deeply connected to these sites’ features 
and affordances. Yet, as we have found in our own work, focusing primarily on the 
technical features of a particular tool might be less useful than highlighting how the 
tools are used in practice. Although the feature set is the most visible characteristic—
as is the case of many technologies—many of the more interesting insights emerge 
when we consider user practices and social implications, although it is far more chal-
lenging to measure, articulate, and theorize about these kinds of changes. Thus, we 
acknowledge the way in which technical and social factors mutually shape one another 
and call for SNS researchers to attend to and describe the technical system in which 
they are collecting data. 

 Although studying SNSs introduces new challenges, this area also provides great oppor-
tunities. As a rapidly moving phenomenon, SNSs complicate researchers’ traditional 
modes of analysis, but this also introduces new methodological opportunities. The vast 
amounts of behavioral and server-level data they contain is seductive, but it is important 
that researchers do not lose sight of the value of inquiries that do not rely on large datasets. 
Social network sites have opened up new venues and possibilities for analyzing human 
interactions, but it is essential that researchers do not become too enamored with these 
new systems. Scholars have the potential to—and, indeed, the responsibility to—interrogate 
emergent phenomena with a critical eye. Thus, we invite researchers to clearly articulate 
the assumptions and biases of their methods, attend to the wide array of research 
 possibilities presented by social network sites, and embrace the possibilities these contexts 
offer for refining existing theories and developing new ones. 



170   the oxford handbook of internet studies

 References 
 Anderson, J. and  Bernoff, J. (2010). “A Global Update of Social Technographics,” Forrester 

Research Report, September 28. 
 Baym, N. K. (2000).  Tune In, Log On: Soaps, Fandom, and Online Community , Thousand 

Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 boyd, d. and  Crawford, K. (2012).  “Critical Questions for Big Data: Provocations for a Cultural, 

Technological, and Scholarly Phenomenon,” Information, Communication, & Society 15(5): 
662–79. 

 boyd, d. and  Ellison, N. B. (2007). “Social Network Sites: Definition, History, and Scholarship,” 
 Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication , 13(1): 210–30. 

 boyd, d. ,  Golder, S. , and  Lotan, G. (2010). “Tweet Tweet Retweet: Conversational Aspects of 
Retweeting on Twitter.” Proceedings of HICSS-42, Persistent Conversation Track. Kauai, 
HI: IEEE Computer Society. January 5–8, 2010. 

 boyd, d. and  Marwick, A. (2011). “Social Privacy in Networked Publics: Teens’ Attitudes, 
Practices, and Strategies,” Paper presented at Oxford Internet Institute’s Decade in Time 
Symposium, September 22. 

 Burke, M. ,  Kraut, R. , and  Marlow, C. (2011). “Social Capital on Facebook: Differentiating Uses 
and Users.” ACM CHI 2011: Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. 

 Crawford, K. (2009). “These Foolish Things: On Intimacy and Insignificance in Mobile 
Media,” in  G. Goggin and  L. Hjorth (eds).  Mobile Technologies: From Telecommunications to 
Media , New York: Routledge, pp. 252–265. 

 Di Gennaro, C. and  Dutton, W. (2007). “Reconfiguring Friendships: Social Relationships and 
the Internet,” Information Communication & Society , 10(5): 591–618. 

 Donath, J. (1998). “Identity and Deception in the Virtual Community,” in  M. Smith and
 P. Kollock (eds).  Communities in Cyberspace , London: Routledge. 

 Döring, N. (2002). “Personal Home Pages on the Web: A Review of Research,” Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication , 7(3). Available at < http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol7/
issue3/doering.html >. Accessed May 6, 2012. 

 Dwyer, C. ,  Hiltz, S. R. , and  Passerini, K. (2007). “Trust and Privacy Concern within Social 
Networking Sites: A Comparison of Facebook and MySpace.” Proceedings of the Thirteenth 
Americas Conference on Information Systems (AMCIS). 

 Ellison, N. ,  Hancock, J. T. , and  Toma, C. L. (2012). “Profile as Promise: A Framework for 
Conceptualizing Veracity in Online Dating Self-Presentations,”  New Media & Society, 14(1): 
45–62 . 

 ——  Heino, R. , and  Gibbs, J. (2006). “Managing Impressions Online: Self-Presentation Processes 
in the Online Dating Environment,”  Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication , 11(2): 
article 2. Available at < http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol11/issue2/ ellison.html >. 

 ——  Steinfield, C. , and Lampe, C. (2007). “The Benefits of Facebook ‘Friends’: Exploring the 
Relationship between College Students’ Use of Online Social Networks and Social Capital,” 
 Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication , 12(3): 1143–68. 

 ——, Steinfield, C., and Lampe, C. (2011a). “Connection Strategies: Social Capital 
Implications of Facebook-Enabled Communication Practices,” New Media & Society 
13(6): 873–92. 

 ——  Vitak, J. ,  Gray, R.,  Lampe, C., and Brooks, B. (2011b). “Cultivating Social Resources 
on Facebook: Signals of Relational Investment and their Role in Social Capital Processes,” 
Paper presented at the iCS-OII 2011 “A Decade in Internet Time,” Symposium, 
Oxford, UK. 



sociality through social network sites   171

 Fitzpatrick, B. and  Recordon, D. (2007). “Thoughts on the Social Graph.”  Brad Fitz.com, August 
17. Available at <http://bradfitz.com/social-graph-problem/ >. 

 Fono, D. and  Raynes-Goldie, K. (2006). “Hyperfriends and Beyond: Friendship and Social 
Norms on LiveJournal,” in  M. Consalvo and  C. Haythornthwaite (eds). Internet Research 
Annual. Vol. 4: Selected Papers from the Association of Internet Researchers Conference , New 
York: Peter Lang. 

 Gonzales, A. L. and  Hancock, J. T. (2008). “Identity Shift in Computer-Mediated Environments,” 
 Media Psychology , April–June: 11(2): 167–85. 

 Gross, R. and  Acquisti, A. (2005). “Information Revelation and Privacy in Online Social 
Networks,” Paper presented at proceedings of WPES’05, Alexandria, VA: Association of 
Computing Machinery, pp. 71–80. 

 Joinson, A. N. (2008). “Looking at, Looking up or Keeping up with People?: Motives and Use 
of Facebook,” Proceedings of the twenty-sixth annual SIGCHI conference on Human 
 factors in computing systems, New York: ACM, pp. 1027–36. 

 Kiesler, S. ,  Siegel, J. , and  McGuire, T. W. (1984). “Social Psychological Aspects of Computer-
Mediated Communication,”  American Psychologist , 39(10): 1123–34. 

 Lampinen, A., Lehtinen, V., Lehmuskallio, A., and Tamminen, S. (2011). “We’re in it Together: 
Interpersonal Management of Disclosure in Social Network Services,” CHI’11 ACM. 

 Leary, M. R. (1995). Self-Presentation: Impression Management and Interpersonal Behavior , 
Dubuque, IA: Brown and Benchmark Publishers. 

 Lee, J. 8. (2004). “Year of the Blog? Web Diarists Are Now Official Members of Convention 
Press Corps,”  New York Times, July 26. Available at < http://www.nytimes.com/2004/07/26/
us/eyes-nation-internet-year-blog-web-diarists-are-now-official-members-convention
.html >. Accessed June 2, 2011. 

 Lotan, G. ,  Graeff, E. ,  Ananny, M. ,  Gaffney, D. ,  Pearce, I. , and  boyd, d. (2011). “The Revolutions 
Were Tweeted: Information Flows during the 2011 Tunisian and Egyptian Revolutions,” 
 International Journal of Communications , 5: Feature 1375–405. 

 McKeon, M . (2010). “The Evolution of Privacy on Facebook,”  MattMcKeon.com , May 19. 
Available at <http://www.mattmckeon.com/facebook-privacy/>. Accessed October 4, 2011. 

 Madden, M. and  Zickuhr, K. (2011). “65% of Online Adults Use Social Networking Sites,” Pew 
Internet & American Life Project, August 26. Available at <http://pewinternet.org/
Reports/2011/Social-Networking-Sites.aspx>. Accessed June 20, 2012. 

 Manovich, L. (2011). “Trending: The Promises and the Challenges of Big Social Data,” in  M. K. 
Gold, (ed.).  Debates in the Digital Humanities , Minneapolis, MN: The University of 
Minnesota Press. Available at < http://www.manovich.net/DOCS/Manovich_trending_
paper.pdf >. Accessed July 15, 2011. 

 Marwick, A . (2010). “Status Update: Celebrity, Publicity, and Self-Branding in Web 2.0,” 
Dissertation, New York University. 

 —— and  Boyd, D. (2011). “I Tweet Honestly, I Tweet Passionately: Twitter Users, Context 
Collapse, and the Imagined Audience,”  New Media and Society , 13: 96–113. 

 Meyrowitz, J. (1985). No Sense of Place: The Impact of Electronic Media on Social Behaviour , 
NewYork: Oxford University Press. 

 Morris, M. R. ,  Teevan, J. , and  Panovich, K. (2010a). “What Do People Ask Their Social 
Networks, and Why? A Survey Study of Status Message QandA Behavior,” Proceedings of 
CHI 2010, New York: ACM, pp. 1739–48. 

 ——, Teevan, J., and Panovich, K. (2010b). “Comparison of Information Seeking Using Search 
Engines and Social Networks.” Proceedings of ICWSM. Available at < http://www.aaai.org/
Press/Proceedings/proceedings.php >. Accessed May 6, 2012.