OPTIMIZING FOR WHAT?  
ALGORITHMIC AMPLIFICATION AND SOCIETY

Understanding 
Social Media 
Recommendation 
Algorithms
By Arvind Narayanan






This essay was written by Arvind Narayanan, professor of 
computer science at Princeton University, during his time 
as a visiting senior research scientist at the Knight First 
Amendment Institute. Prof. Narayanan oversaw a year-long 
project studying how social media algorithms amplify some 
speech and suppress others. In partnership with the Knight 
Institute, Prof. Narayanan organized a major symposium, 
“Optimizing for What? Algorithmic Amplification and 
Society.” The essays written for that symposium, and 
additional essays from Prof. Narayanan on the same theme, 
are forthcoming from the Knight Institute.

The full series is available at knightcolumbia.org/research/






CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION	 5
SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS ARE “COMPLEX SYSTEMS”	 7
THERE ARE MANY DIFFERENT SOCIAL MEDIA ALGORITHMS	 8
THREE TYPES OF INFORMATION PROPAGATION:  
SUBSCRIPTION, NETWORK, AND ALGORITHM	 9
NETWORKS ENABLE VIRALITY	 12
VIRALITY IS UNPREDICTABLE	 14
VIRAL CONTENT DOMINATES OUR ATTENTION	 15
VIRAL CONTENT IS HIGHLY AMENABLE TO DEMOTION	 16
THE CORE OF THE ALGORITHM IS  
ENGAGEMENT PREDICTION	 18
HOW TO PREDICT ENGAGEMENT	 22
A BRIEF HISTORY OF RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS	 24
WHAT THE ALGORITHM ISN’T	 28
CASE STUDY: MEANINGFUL SOCIAL INTERACTIONS	 30
PLAYING WHAC-A-MOLE WITH HANDS TIED  
BEHIND THEIR BACKS	 31
HOW ENGAGEMENT OPTIMIZATION FAILS USERS,  
CREATORS, AND SOCIETY	 35
THE LIMITS OF DATA SCIENCE	 38
ALGORITHMS ARE NOT THE ENEMY	 40
CONCLUDING THOUGHTS	 41
NOTES	 43

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 3



ABSTRACT

Recommendation algorithms mediate online speech and thus shape society. In 
this essay, I start by explaining the basics of information propagation on social 
media. Then I turn to the role of recommendation algorithms and engagement 
optimization—a role that has become more and more prominent over the last 
decade. I hope to refute the idea that recommendation algorithms are hard 
to understand because they use sophisticated mathematical techniques and 
reveal what is truly hard about understanding their societal effects. Finally, I 
examine the problematic normative assumptions behind today’s recommen-
dation algorithms.

4 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



INTRODUCTION 

When we speak online—when we share a thought, write an 
essay, post a photo or video—who will hear us? The answer is 
determined in large part by algorithms. In computer science, the 

algorithms driving social media are called recommender systems. These 
algorithms are the engine that makes Facebook and YouTube what they 
are, with TikTok more recently showing the power of an almost purely algo-
rithm-driven platform.

In debates about the effects of social media, discussion of algorithms 
tends to be superficial. They are often assumed to be black boxes that are too 
complicated to understand. This is unfortunate. In fact, there is a lot that is 
known about how these algorithms operate. But this knowledge is not yet 
broadly accessible. 

I think a broader understanding of recommendation algorithms is sorely 
needed. Policymakers and legal scholars must understand these algorithms 
so that they can sharpen their thinking on platform governance; journalists 
must understand them so that they can explain them to readers and better 
hold platforms accountable; technologists must understand them so that 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 5



the platforms of tomorrow may be better than the ones we have; researchers 
must understand them so that they can get at the intricate interplay between 
algorithms and human behavior. Content creators would also benefit from 
understanding them so that they can better navigate the new landscape 
of algorithmic distribution. More generally, anyone concerned about the 
impact of algorithmic platforms on themselves or on society may find this 
essay of interest.

I hope to show you that social media algorithms are simple to under-
stand. In addition to the mathematical principles of information cascades 
(which are independent of any platform), it’s also straightforward to under-
stand what recommendation algorithms are trained to do, and what inputs 
they use. Of course, companies’ lack of transparency about some of the 
details is a big problem, but that’s a separate issue from the details being 
hard to understand—they aren’t. In this regard, recommendation algorithms 
are like any other technology, say a car or a smartphone. Many details of 
those products are proprietary, but we can and do understand how cars 
and smartphones work. Once we understand the basics of recommendation 
algorithms, we can also gain clarity on which details matter for transparency. 

In composing this essay, I’ve relied on the computer science literature 
on social networks, recommender systems, and related topics; companies’ 
(minimal) public documentation of their algorithms; the documents leaked 
by Facebook whistleblower Frances Haugen;1 and a few of my own observa-
tions. My contribution is to synthesize this information, introduce conceptual 
frameworks for understanding it, and describe it without jargon. My goal 
is not to explain the tech for its own sake but rather with a view to under-
standing its societal effects. To that end, I’ve also included commentary on 
problems with algorithmic recommendations, specifically algorithms that 
optimize for engagement.

6 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS ARE  
“COMPLEX SYSTEMS”

Ac omplex system is one whose behavior arises in nonlinear, often 
unpredictable ways from those of its parts.2 This phenomenon is 
called emergence. For example, traffic is famously a complex sys-

tem.3 Adding a road to a network of roads, keeping everything else the same, 
can slow the overall traffic through it.

Social media platforms are complex systems subject to various emergent 
behaviors and patterns of feedback. Social movements can form in a flash 
as attention to an event or a cause begets more attention.4 U.S. politicians 
learned to be less civil because such posts garnered more attention.5 Matias 
and Wright document many other feedback loops.6

Figure 1: The effects of information propagation on platforms emerge through 
the interaction of design and user behavior, based on underlying mathemat-
ical principles. Design comprises algorithms, the user interface, and various 
policies, such as content moderation policies. Platform designers, users, and 
content creators all adapt to emergent effects.

Platform design matters but isn’t the whole picture. Many pathologies 
of social media are attributed either to human behavior or to the algorithms 
that mediate information propagation when they are in fact the result of 
both. Consider these examples of either-or thinking to explain observed or 
hypothesized phenomena: 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 7



•	 “People on Twitter are too negative,” versus “The Twitter algorithm 
rewards negativity.” 

•	 “YouTube’s algorithm pushes users into rabbit holes,” versus “It’s not 
the algorithm, it’s users’ natural behavior.” 

My view is that these and many other phenomena are emergent effects 
of human-algorithm interactions. The research community is not close to 
being able to fully observe and explain the underlying feedback loops, both 
because the methods remain immature and because of lack of adequate 
access to platforms. 

THERE ARE MANY DIFFERENT  
SOCIAL MEDIA ALGORITHMS

There are many algorithms behind any large social media platform. 
The table shows a rough categorization of the major algorithms. One 
set of algorithms processes content. Another set of algorithms propa-

gates it, that is, helps determine who sees what. The set of content processing 
algorithms is relatively fluid as new types of content become prominent and 
new algorithmic capabilities emerge. The set of content propagation algo-
rithms is relatively stable.7

Table 1: Major social media algorithms. 

8 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



While all these algorithms are important, my main focus in this essay 
is on content recommendation algorithms. These algorithms generate our 
social media feeds. They show up in a few other places, like YouTube sidebar 
recommendations. They aren’t limited to social media or user-generated 
content: Movie recommendations on Netflix and product recommendations 
on Amazon belong to the same class of algorithms. Why focus on recommen-
dation algorithms? Compared to search, recommendation drives a bigger 
(and increasing) fraction of engagement. More importantly, the platform 
has almost complete control over what to recommend a user, whereas search 
results are relatively tightly constrained by the search term. 

Even the “recommendation algorithm” on any large platform is in fact a 
whole suite of algorithms, but they are tightly coupled, so I will refer to them 
collectively as “the algorithm.” Sometimes I refer to recommendation algo-
rithms collectively, and sometimes I refer to a specific platform’s algorithm.

THREE TYPES OF INFORMATION PROPAGATION: 
SUBSCRIPTION, NETWORK, AND ALGORITHM

Not all social media feeds are algorithmic, and not all the emer-
gent effects we’re concerned with involve algorithms. It’s extremely 
helpful to understand the three fundamental ways in which the 

information-propagation component of a platform can be designed. No 
platform follows precisely one of these models; they all mix and match. Still, 
it’s best to understand the basic models first, and then think about how they 
are combined in any given system.

Table 2: Three stylized models of information propagation.

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 9



Figure 2: Three models of information propagation: subscription, network, and 
algorithm, showing the propagation of one individual post. In the subscription 
model, the post reaches those who have subscribed to the poster. In the network 
model, it cascades through the network as long as users who see it choose to 
further propagate it. In the algorithmic model shown here, users with similar 
interests (as learned by the algorithm based on their past engagement) are 
depicted closer to each other. The more similar a user’s interests are to the 
poster’s, the more likely they are to be recommended the post. Of course, other 
algorithmic logics are possible.

The subscription model is straightforward: Each user subscribes to a set 
of creators, and their feed consists of posts from their creators. In traditional 
media, we call this broadcast. If you subscribe to a set of newspapers, or a 
set of cable channels, then that’s the content you receive. 

Note that originally (in the 2000s), neither Facebook nor Twitter had the 
ability to reshare or retweet posts in your feed. This critical feature is what 
separates the subscription model from the network model. In the network 
model, a user sees not only posts created by those they’ve subscribed to, 
but also posts that those users choose to amplify, creating the possibility 
of information cascades (“viral” posts). Before Twitter introduced the algo-
rithmically ranked feed in 2016, it followed a network model almost purely.8 
This is usually what people mean by “chronological feed.”  

Let’s take a minute to understand the algorithmic model. Very few plat-
forms implement a purely algorithmic model, so it’s tricky to get a good intu-
ition for it. In this model, the posts a user sees are those that the algorithm 
predicts they are most likely to engage with (the definition of engagement is 

10 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



critical, but let’s put that aside for now). There is no social network. That is, 
there is no ability for users to follow, subscribe to, or connect with others—or, 
if there is, it doesn’t determine what shows up on a user’s feed.

TikTok’s “For You Page,” which is where users spend almost all of their 
time, is famously algorithmic.9 Google has an algorithmic news recommen-
dation product called Google Discover. Surprisingly little has been said about 
it given that it is a product that Google heavily promotes to its over 3 billion 
mobile users.10 YouTube uses a mix of the subscription and algorithmic 
models (without much in the way of network dynamics) but heavily tilted 
toward algorithms.11 

Over the past two decades, the progression has been from the subscrip-
tion model to the network model to the algorithmic model. We appear to be 
in the middle of the latter shift (from network to algorithm), notably with 
Instagram and Facebook. Other platforms are facing similar pressure as 
well, because of the success of TikTok. Any such shift has major impacts on 
the platform as a business, on the type of content that’s amplified, and on 
the user experience. For example, Instagram’s changes led to a user outcry 
that forced it to roll back some changes.12

Perhaps the biggest impact of the shift to the algorithmic model is on 
content creators. In the subscription and network models, creators can 
focus on building their network. In the algorithmic model, that doesn’t help, 
because the number of subscribers is irrelevant to how posts will perform. 
(If this sounds unintuitive, it’s because no platform implements a purely 
algorithmic model, and the network always matters to some degree.) Instead, 
the audience for each post is independently optimized based on the topic 
and the “quality” of the post. In this idealized setting, considering other 
factors such as the performance of past posts by that creator can only detract 
from the goal of optimizing the audience for the present post. Of course, the 
algorithm’s notion of quality might not be normatively desirable: The content 
that it amplifies might not align with our idea of healthy discourse. In any 
case, the less emphasis there is on the network, the less predictability and 
control creators have over the reach of their content. An algorithm change 
that devalues a particular type of content could wipe out a creator at any time.

To reiterate: The three models I’ve presented are idealized, and I’ve 
found the categorization helpful as an analytical lens, but almost no real 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 11



platform adheres entirely to any one model. For example, even platforms 
that implement the subscription and network models tend to use recom-
mendation algorithms in one important way: to rank posts in a user’s feed, 
although not to determine which posts to include or exclude. Most users don’t 
consume their entire feed: For example, Instagram reported that in 2016, 
users saw only 30% of the posts in their feed.13 This means that the ranking 
algorithm makes a big difference to engagement. So most of what I’ll say in 
this essay about the algorithmic model applies broadly to social media, not 
just to the platforms I’ve categorized as algorithmic.

The three models increase in complexity with respect to the way infor-
mation propagates. The subscription model is straightforward, so I won’t say 
much more about it. But there’s a lot to say about the network model, so I’ll 
discuss that in the next few sections. Understanding those details will help 
us better appreciate the significance of the turn to algorithms.

NETWORKS ENABLE VIRALITY

Consider these two tweets: One is an in-depth thread about 
an intriguing document, and the other regurgitates political 
talking points.14 One of these tweets was viral, and the other 

wasn’t. Which is which?

Based on the retweet and like counts, @JoeBiden’s tweet was more 
popular. But virality is not popularity. It’s about whether the piece of con-
tent spread in the manner of a virus, that is, from person to person in the 
network, rather than as a broadcast. It turns out that this can be measured, 
and we can assign a single number called structural virality that captures 
how viral something is.

12 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



Figure 3: Information cascade patterns representing viral and broadcast 
propagation (stylized). From Goel et al.15

Structural virality is the answer to the question: “How far from the poster 
did the post travel through the network?” It’s a simple question that reveals 
a lot, illustrated by the stylized trees (in computer science, “trees” are drawn 
upside down). The cascade pattern of a tweet like @JameelJaffer’s would look 
like the one on the left, retweeted by many people who aren’t following the 
original account, whereas @JoeBiden’s tweet would look like the one on the 
right. The structural virality of a post is the number of degrees of separation, 
on average, between users in the corresponding tree. The deeper the tree, 
with more branches, the greater the structural virality.

Structural virality was defined in a paper by Goel, Anderson, Hofman, 
and Watts.16 To illustrate, they show six actual Twitter cascades with varying 
degrees of virality, ordered from least to most viral. 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 13



VIRALITY IS UNPREDICTABLE

The figure shows a visualization of how information spreads in 
a social network. Both simulations use the same network with nodes 
(users) behaving identically: resharing information that they see with 

a certain probability. Purely due to this randomness, the information cascade 
evolves very differently in the two simulations. Not only does the cascade 
reach a much greater number of nodes in one simulation than the other, it 
also spreads through a different part of the network.

Figure 4: Simulation of information cascades in a social network, illustrat-
ing the unpredictability of virality.

Note that the unpredictability of user behavior is inevitable. Simply 
depending on the time of day that a user happens to be on the app, the set 

14 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



of posts they would see in their feed might differ substantially. 
Research on real-world social networks supports the hypothesis that 

reach is unpredictable. A 2016 study attempted to predict the number of 
retweets of a given tweet based on the information available when it was 
tweeted: the content of the tweet and information about the creator.17 
The most accurate model in the study could explain no more than half 
the variance in retweet counts. More significantly, it was hardly more 
accurate than a model that ignored tweet content and was restricted to 
only looking at user information (follower count, performance of past 
tweets, etc.). Of course, for a given creator, the user information is fixed, 
and only the tweet content varies, so reach is essentially completely 
unpredictable, at least based on the methods used in the paper.

VIRAL CONTENT DOMINATES OUR ATTENTION

The unpredictability of virality is a fact of life for creators. It 
is made worse by the fact that only a small fraction of posts are likely 
to go viral. The structural virality paper quantifies this (on a global 

level rather than a per-creator level): In their dataset, less than 1 in 100,000 
tweets is retweeted 1,000 times. Intuitively, this makes sense: Attention is 
finite, so there can be only a certain amount of viral content going around 
at any given time, and competition for popularity is intense. 

My hypothesis is that on every major platform, for most creators, the 
majority of engagement comes from a small fraction of viral content. The 
data that I’ve seen from studies and from my own investigations is con-
sistent with this: The distribution of engagement is highly skewed. A 2022 
paper quantified this for TikTok and YouTube: On TikTok, the top 20% of an 
account’s videos get 76% of the views, and an account’s most viewed video 
is on average 64 times more popular than its median video.18 On YouTube, 
the top 20% of an account’s videos get 73% of the views, and an account’s 
most viewed video is on average 40 times more popular than its median 
video. In general, the more significant the role of the algorithm in propa-
gating content, as opposed to subscriptions or the network, the greater this 
inequality seems to be.

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 15



Here’s a visualization of the significance of virality. For the purposes of 
this visualization, I define a viral post by a creator as one whose engagement 
is over five times the median engagement of that creator’s posts. I use this 
alternative definition since structural virality is not publicly visible.19 In 
reality, viral content is even more significant than appears from this kind 
of illustration, because virality is the main way to reach new audiences and 
gradually grow one’s reach over time.

Figure 5: The significance of virality for one selected account. The level of skew 
shown here is quite common, though there is substantial variation between 
accounts.20

 

VIRAL CONTENT IS HIGHLY  
AMENABLE TO DEMOTION

Demotion, downranking, reduction, or suppression, often col-
loquially called shadowbanning, is a “soft” content moderation 
technique in which content deemed problematic is shown to fewer 

users, but not removed from the platform.21 There are many ways to imple-
ment it. For example, Facebook ranks demoted posts lower in users’ feeds 

16 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



than they would otherwise rank, the idea being that users are less likely to 
encounter and further spread them.

A seemingly small interference by the platform can drastically decrease 
the reach of downranked content. To illustrate this, I use a simplified model 
of demotion and simulate varying degrees of demotion. Specifically, in this 
model, the post is demoted in such a way that the probability of a user seeing 
it (conditional on its appearing in their feed) decreases by 10%, 20%, or 30% 
respectively.

Figure 6: Simulation to illustrate the effect of demotion.

Without demotion, the post would reach the majority of the network. A 
10% reduction has little impact; the reach remains almost the same. But a 
20% reduction causes its reach to drop tenfold, and the content only reaches 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 17



the poster’s immediate network. The specific numbers here are not import-
ant; the point is that the effect of demotion on reach can be unpredictable, 
nonlinear, and sometimes drastic.

Demotion is nontransparent because it isn’t necessarily noticeable by 
the poster’s followers (as the post still appears in their feeds) and because 
low reach isn’t automatically suspicious, since there is a large amount of 
variation in the natural reach of a poster’s content. By the same token, users 
may sometimes incorrectly conclude that they have been “shadowbanned” 
when their reach is low.

THE CORE OF THE ALGORITHM  
IS ENGAGEMENT PREDICTION

Platform companies may have many high-level goals they 
care about: ad revenue, keeping users happy and getting them 
to come back, and perhaps also less mercenary, more civic goals. 

But there’s a problem: None of those goals are of much use when an 
algorithm is faced with a decision about what to feed a specific user at a 
specific moment in time. There isn’t a good way to measurably connect 
this kind of micro-level decision to its long-term impact.

That’s where engagement comes in. By engagement I mean any score 
that is defined only in terms of the moment-to-moment actions of the user. 
And that is its great virtue. For every single post in the user’s feed, the algo-
rithm receives feedback about whether and how the user engaged with it. 
That is why the primary objective of almost every recommendation algorithm 
on social media platforms is to rank the available content according to how 
likely it is that the user in question will engage with it. 

In a sense, engagement is a proxy for high-level goals. A user who is 
engaged is more likely to keep returning and generate ad revenue for the 
platform. Because it is only a proxy, and developers are aware of its limits, 
there are many other considerations that go into platform algorithms. In 
terms of code, the part that calculates engagement may be only a small 
fraction. Yet it is the core logic, and it is a fruitful way to understand how 
content propagates on major platforms. 

18 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



Here are some stylized examples of the flavors of engagement that 
various platforms optimize for.22 A few caveats: I only list the primary 
optimization objective, which I think helps understand the essence of 
each platform. There may be many little tweaks in how engagement is 
calculated. This list reflects my best understanding based on the sources 
I cite. I have no insight into the matter beyond what has been publicly 
reported. In general, optimization targets are weighted averages of 
engagement signals available to the platform.

•	 Facebook optimizes for “Meaningful Social Interactions,” a weighted 
average of Likes, Reactions, Reshares, and Comments.23

•	 Twitter, similarly, combines all the types of interaction that a user might 
have with a tweet.24

•	 YouTube optimizes for expected watch time, that is, how long the 
algorithm predicts the video will be watched.25 If a user sees a video in 
their recommendations and doesn’t click on it, the watch time is zero. 
If they click on it and hit the back button after a minute, the watch time 
is one minute. Before 2012, YouTube optimized for click-through rate 
instead, which led to clickbait thumbnails (such a sexualized imagery) 
becoming ubiquitous; hence the shift to watch time.26

•	 Less is known about TikTok’s algorithm than those of the other major 
platforms, but it appears broadly similar: a combination of liking, 
commenting, and play time.27 The documentation says that whether 
a video was watched to completion is a strong signal, and this factor 
probably gives the platform some of its uniqueness.28 One indirect 
indication of the importance of this signal is that very short videos 
under 15 seconds—which are more likely to be played to completion, 
and thus score highly—continue to dominate the platform, despite 
the length restriction having been removed.29 That might be because 
shorter videos are more likely to be watched to completion, and thus 
amplified and incentivized by the algorithm.

•	 Netflix originally optimized for suggesting movies that the user is likely 
to rate highly on a scale of one to five; this was the basis for a $1M rec-
ommender system competition, the Netflix Prize, in 2006.30 But now 
it uses a more complex approach.31

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 19



Given a user and a post, the engagement prediction algorithm calcu-
lates a guess for how likely the user is to engage with the post if shown in 
their feed. To a first approximation, generating the user’s feed is a matter of 
ranking all the posts that can be shown (in the order of decreasing predicted 
engagement). So Facebook would start with the post which it thinks you are 
most likely to like, react, reshare, or comment on; YouTube would start with 
the video that you are most likely to click on and continue watching, with 
videos that you are likely to watch for longer scoring higher. In Facebook’s 
case, the set of candidate posts primarily consists of updates related to your 
friends or pages you follow, but this appears to be changing.32 In YouTube’s 
case, any video can potentially be recommended. 

On top of this baseline logic, there are a whole bunch of secondary 
considerations. 

•	 Keeping the computation tractable is an overriding consideration; 
slowing down the user experience is not considered an option. This 
is handled by first applying a candidate generation step that whittles 
the universe of content down to about a few hundred candidates.33 It 
doesn’t have to be accurate and only needs to select posts, not rank 
them, which is much faster. The engagement prediction/ranking algo-
rithm is applied only to this smaller set. Once engagement predictions 
are calculated, the remaining considerations on this list are applied.

•	 If the user engages with content from a particular poster, each post 
from that poster will tend to rank highly. So the naive algorithm above 
would generate a feed that is overwhelmed by one or a small number 
of posters, which is undesirable. It is better to diversify the feed in 
terms of posters and topics. A diverse menu is also a defense against 
the algorithm’s uncertainty about what the user wants at any given 
moment, because even the best algorithm is far from perfect at pre-
dicting engagement. 

•	 That said, it is possible to tailor recommendations based on the user’s 
“context”: their geolocation, device, the content they have interacted 
with immediately prior, and so on. This context is one input to the 
engagement prediction algorithm.

•	 Platforms like Netflix and Spotify have found that explaining why a 

20 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



recommendation was made makes them more persuasive.34 They have 
made various modifications to their algorithms to enable this. Almost 
all platforms provide some degree of explanation, even if it isn’t as 
central to the user experience as it is on Netflix or Spotify.

•	 Lately, platforms have started incorporating considerations of fairness 
to creators, such as gender fairness, to combat user biases and the way 
that algorithms amplify those biases if there is no intervention.35

•	 There’s a trade-off between recommending content similar to what 
the user has engaged with in the past, which is a safe choice, and 
recommending new types of content so that the algorithm can learn 
whether the user is interested in it—and perhaps influence the user to 
acquire new interests. There’s a class of algorithms devoted to opti-
mally navigating this trade-off. TikTok is notable for its emphasis on 
exploration.36

•	 There is a near-endless list of subtle technical challenges. One exam-
ple: If a user engaged with the first, third, and sixth posts in their feed, 
out of 10 posts, to what extent does that reflect the user’s true prefer-
ences, versus the fact that people are generally more likely to pay more 
attention to posts closer to the top of their feed? The algorithm needs 
to disentangle these two factors.

While there are many differences in the particulars, the similarities 
between different platforms’ recommendation algorithms overwhelm their 
differences. And the differences that do exist are generally specific to the 
design of the platforms. For example, YouTube optimizes for expected watch 
time, but Twitter doesn’t, because Twitter is not video based. Spotify has the 
somewhat unique challenge of generating playlists that are coherent as a 
whole, rather than merely compiling a list of individually appealing track 
recommendations, so its logic departs somewhat substantially from the 
above. Perhaps for this reason, it relies more on content analysis and less 
on behavior.37

In other words, there is no competitive risk to platform companies from 
being more open about their algorithms. This might contradict one’s mental 
picture of the algorithm being closely guarded secret sauce. In a blog post 
analyzing TikTok, I argued that this view is a myth, but that argument applies 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 21



to other platforms too.38
In fact, most major platform companies are quite open about discussing 

their recommendation algorithms at academic and industry conferences and 
learn from each other. Much of what I wrote above is disclosed in well-known 
research papers. But it turns out that the details that matter from a research and 
engineering perspective are subtly different from those that matter to users and 
to society. And companies seem to have little incentive to be transparent about 
the algorithm with those stakeholders. That explains the current unsatisfactory 
and somewhat paradoxical state of algorithmic transparency. Besides, com-
panies have shared precious little about the effects of algorithms. There have 
only ever been two published studies from major platform companies looking 
at the effects of their algorithms, as far as I’m aware.39

HOW TO PREDICT ENGAGEMENT

To recap, the recommendation algorithms behind the major 
platforms are more similar than they are different in what they seek to 
accomplish. What varies quite a bit is how they optimize engagement: 

the signals they use and the computational techniques involved. But even 
here, the high-level logic is more-or-less the same. To predict engagement 
by a given user on a given post, most major recommendation algorithms try 
to answer the question:

How did users similar to this user engage with posts similar to  
this post?

The intuition behind this logic is straightforward: Two people who 
have something in common—a hometown, a hobby, a community they are 
embedded in, a celebrity they follow—will both engage with posts that relate 
to that shared interests. While the intuition is compelling, the reason this 
approach is popular is that it has repeatedly proven to work well in practice.

To break it down, let’s start with similarity between users. There are 
three main types of signals that are available: network, behavior, and demo-
graphics. Network refers to the user’s interaction with others: following, 

22 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



subscription, commenting, and so on. Platforms vary in how much emphasis 
they place on this signal. Twitter relies heavily on the user-user network.40 
But on TikTok or YouTube, which place less emphasis on following, this sig-
nal is likely to be less useful. On platforms that don’t have a social network, 
such as Netflix, the signal isn’t available at all.

Behavior is the most critical signal. Two users are similar if they have 
engaged with a similar set of posts. Its importance is a matter of sheer vol-
ume. Here’s a simple calculation: If a user spends an hour a day on TikTok 
for four years,41 the average video length is 20 seconds, and they skip half 
the videos, the platform has interaction records on over half a million videos 
for that single user.

Demographics refers to attributes such as age, gender, and, more impor-
tantly, language and geography. Demographic information is useful when 
a user first joins the platform since there is little else to rely on. But once the 
user starts leaving a behavioral record, its importance rapidly diminishes.

In fact, the algorithm can automatically infer demographics like age, 
gender, and race as a side-effect of looking for patterns in the data, even if 
there was no intention to infer them. A few years ago, many Netflix users com-
plained that their thumbnails seemed to be personalized to their race, such 
as Black users being shown a movie thumbnail containing two minor char-
acters who are Black.42 In response, the company pointed out that it doesn’t 
ask users for race or ethnicity. But there is no contradiction: Demographic 
targeting can be an emergent effect of personalizing by viewing history. Race 
is a social construct, but it is one that is reflected in our behavior to some 
degree, and that is enough for the algorithm to reconstruct the category of 
race or something similar to it from behavioral records.

Turning from similarity between users to similarity between posts, the 
most obvious attribute that could be used for computing post similarity is 
content. The term content in this context usually refers to metadata (say, the 
title and description of a video) and less commonly the full content (i.e., the 
byte stream). The idea is simple: If a user likes a video on a particular topic, 
they will probably like other videos on the same topic. 

To analyze content in this way, a set of “feature extraction” algorithms 
preprocesses posts and represents them in a form that’s more digestible to 
algorithms: as a series of attributes (features). A simple example of a feature 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 23



is the language or languages that appear in a post. Other features may be 
much more complex.

More and more, normative evaluations of posts are also included among 
the features. A canonical example is a score representing the likelihood that 
a post is hate speech. Posts may get algorithmically demoted based on such 
features—that is, their reach will be limited. This blurs the line between 
content moderation and algorithmic recommendation.

The other main signal relating to posts is, again, behavior: Two posts 
are similar if a similar set of users have engaged with them. Most platforms 
use both types of signals. As before, when a post has just been shared, the 
content signal predominates in importance, but as it accumulates an inter-
action history, behavior becomes more important.43 

The most important fact to keep in mind is that the behavioral record is 
the fuel of the recommendation engine.

It might be surprising that recommendation algorithms are so simple to 
describe, given that large teams of highly skilled engineers work on them. 
But it takes a lot of ingenuity to translate high-level ideas of the sort I’ve 
described into an algorithm. In particular, keeping the computation tractable 
is a major challenge. The volume of information is vast: Based on the back-
of-the-envelope calculations for TikTok above, the number of behavioral 
records may be of the order of a quadrillion (1015). A naive algorithm—for 
instance, one that attempted to compute the affinity between each user and 
each post—would be millions of times slower than an optimized one, and 
no amount of hardware power can make up the difference. 

A BRIEF HISTORY OF  
RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS

The first large-scale and widely known online recommenda-
tion algorithm was deployed by Amazon in the late 1990s. Netflix 
followed soon after in 2000.44 Both platforms quickly found that 

recommendations drove a substantial percentage of their purchases or 
rentals, and other companies began to adopt them. Considering their 
success in the e-commerce sector, it’s surprising that social media plat-
forms took so long to make recommendation algorithms a key part of 

24 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



how they work: It only started happening in the 2010s. 
The first generation of large-scale recommendation algorithms, such 

as Amazon and Netflix in the early 2000s, used a simple technique called 
collaborative filtering: “Customers who bought this also bought that.”45 To 
recommend items to a user on their homepage when they’re not looking 
at any particular item, simply take the recommendation lists of the items 
they’ve viewed or bought in the past, and aggregate the lists in some sensible 
way. Although crude by today’s standards, collaborative filtering proved 
powerful in e-commerce, sometimes finding surprising correlations between 
products. The story about supermarkets putting beer next to diapers to cater 
to frazzled fathers is apocryphal but accurately conveys the idea that the 
purchase data might reveal non-obvious connections.46 

In 2006, Netflix publicly released movie ratings by half a million of its 
users, totaling 100 million ratings, and asked researchers to use this data 
to improve its recommendation algorithm. The most accurate algorithm 
would win a million-dollar prize. The contest supercharged the research 
field—not because of the prize, but because it was by far the largest such 
dataset available publicly. 

The big insight to come out of the contest was the idea of matrix factor-
ization, which undergirded what I see as the second generation of recom-
mendation algorithms. Here’s the idea, illustrated with a hypothetical toy 
example. In this matrix describing the past engagement scores of a few users 
with a few videos, there are clearly many patterns. What might explain them?

The following figure reveals it. To generate the data, I assumed that each 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 25



video has two qualities: whether it’s funny and whether it’s informative.
Some users like funny videos, some like informative videos, and some like 
both. If a video contains one attribute that a user likes, they give it a . If it 
contains two, they give it a . 

As oversimplified as this toy example seems, it turns out that real data-
sets show similar patterns. Of course, there are millions of users and posts, 
and hundreds or thousands of attributes (and user preferences regarding 
those attributes). And engagement can’t be exactly explained or predicted 
using those attributes: The predictions are merely correlated with the 
observed values, and there is a lot of noise. Most importantly, the matrices 
are “sparse”: Users have only ever come across a tiny fraction of the available 
posts, so most cells in the matrix are actually marked “N/A.”

Despite the size, noisiness, and sparsity of real-world datasets, it 
turns out that matrix factorization algorithms can identify—given only the 
matrix—a set of attributes and preferences which, when combined, result in 
approximately the same matrix. The algorithm can’t label those attributes 
with human-interpretable terms like “funny” or “informative,” but it doesn’t 
matter! Once it figures out those post attributes and user preferences, the 
algorithm can predict whether a user will like a post they’ve never encoun-
tered before.

This idea was a revolution in recommender systems research. Contes-
tants who used it shot to the top of the Netflix Prize leaderboard, and its 

26 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



value became apparent. By the end, all the top contestants, including the 
winner, used it. Note that this algorithm uses only behavioral records and 
completely ignores user demographics and movie metadata such as genre. 
In fact, given large enough behavioral records, it will automatically discover 
genres as attributes underlying the matrix!47 The algorithm would refer to 
the attributes by opaque IDs rather than labels like “comedy” or “action,” 
but again, it doesn’t matter if the only goal is prediction.

Matrix factorization is my favorite example of research that wows people 
in the lab but doesn’t translate well to the real world. Unexplainable predic-
tions were just fine for the contest but didn’t make for a great user experience. 
Being told you’ll like a movie without being told why is unsatisfying. Look 
at Netflix today: It labels recommendations with categories like “feel-good 
comedy dramas,” for good reason.

Besides, for social media, matrix factorization is a nonstarter. Netflix, at 
the time, had a tiny inventory of about 18,000 videos, so the algorithm was 
possible to compute. On a scale of billions of posts, it is computationally 
intractable, especially considering that the algorithm has to work in real time 
as new posts are constantly being uploaded. It’s possible that computational 
difficulty might be one reason why many social media platforms were late 
to the recommendation game. Due to the dominance of matrix factorization 
in the research world in the late 2000s, they may have rejected the entire 
approach as infeasible.

But once social media platforms started adopting recommendation 
algorithms, there was no turning back. By the time ByteDance launched 
TikTok in 2016, recommendation algorithms were successful enough that 
making the algorithm the core of the product would have been an obvious 
idea. Interestingly, ByteDance and its founder Zhang Yiming are reported to 
have launched a series of products going back to 2012 with the same concept: 
algorithmic content recommendations without a social network.48

Today there is a diversity of algorithms in use. One powerful technique is 
to “embed” users and posts as points in a high-dimensional space (with, say, 
a few hundred or a few thousand dimensions).49 Distances between users and 
posts roughly capture the idea of similarities in attributes and preferences. 
Deep learning is usually, but not always, used to learn the embedding: the 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 27



mapping from a behavioral record to a point in the high-dimensional space.50
It’s worth pausing to ask how well recommendation algorithms work. 

It may seem obvious that they must work well, considering that they power 
tech platforms that are worth tens or hundreds of billions of dollars. But the 
numbers tell a different story. One way to quantify it is by engagement rate: 
the likelihood that a user engages with a post that is recommended to them. 
On most platforms, it is less than 1%. TikTok is an outlier, but even there, it is 
only a little over 5%.51 This is not because the algorithms are bad, but because 
people are just not that predictable. As I’ve argued elsewhere, when the user 
interface is good enough, users don’t mind the low accuracy.52

Does that mean that all this algorithm talk is nonsense? If they were 
so hit-or-miss, how can recommendation algorithms possibly be causing 
all that is attributed to them? Well, even though they are imprecise at the 
level of individual users, they are accurate in the aggregate. Compared to 
network-based platforms, algorithmic platforms seem to be more effective at 
identifying viral content (that will resonate with a large number of people). 
They are also good at identifying niche content and matching it to the subset 
of users who may be receptive to it. I believe it is in the aggregate sense that 
recommendation algorithms are most powerful—and sometimes dangerous.

WHAT THE ALGORITHM ISN’T

Social media companies have hired hundreds of psychologists.53 
So it’s easy to imagine that platform algorithms have programmed into 
them an array of insights about how to recommend content that hooks 

us. That’s not the case. Behavioral expertise is useful in designing the user 
interfaces of apps, but there is little human knowledge or intuition about 
what would make for a good recommendation that goes into the design of 
their algorithms. The algorithms are largely limited to looking for patterns 
in behavioral data. They don’t have common sense. 

This can lead to algorithmic absurdities: like ads featuring earwax, toe-
nail fungus, or other disgusting imagery.54 Again, it’s easy to imagine that 
this is the result of (devious) intent: evil advertisers spending money just so 

28 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



they can cackle in the knowledge that millions of people around the world 
are getting grossed out. 

But it is almost certainly the result of algorithmic optimization of click-
through rates (which advertisers have learned to exploit for their own pur-
poses). The key thing to remember is that the click through rate for ads is 
infinitesimal.55 So if even, say, 0.1% of people click on gross-out ads for 
whatever reason—morbid curiosity?—the ad engines count that as success. 
They don’t see and don’t care about the people who hit the back button as 
soon as they see the image. This harms the publisher in addition to the user, 
but neither party has any much power to change things.

Although the approach of optimization based on machine learning is 
ubiquitous today, it wasn’t always the case. Take Facebook. Back in 2010, 
it used an algorithm it called “EdgeRank” to construct a user’s feed. This is 
what it looked like:56

priority(user, item) = affinity(user, poster) * Weight[item.type] / item.age

This formula is invoked for every item that can potentially be shown to 
the user, i.e., content posted or shared by their friends, events in the user’s 
area, etc. Items are shown in decreasing order of priority, likely with a few 
additional tweaks not captured in this formula. 

The two key ingredients in the formula are the affinity score and the 
item type weights. The affinity score represents Facebook’s prediction of how 
much the user in question wants to see updates from the poster. This was 
again a manually programmed formula that took into account things like 
whether the user recently interacted with the poster; no machine learning 
was involved. The item type weight reflected Facebook engineers’ predictions 
regarding the type of content that was more engaging: photos more than text, 
for example. These were also manually set rather than learned. To be clear, 
the manual judgments I refer to are about broad types of content, such as 
photos, comments, events, and so on. They are not at the level of individual 
users or posts, or even categories of users or posts such as “elected officials” 
or “breaking news.” 

The inverse dependence57 of priority on the age of the item means that 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 29



newer items are more likely to be at the top. But this is not a strict relation-
ship: An older item from a poster with high affinity to the user can still end 
up on top. That means that the feed was roughly reverse chronological, but 
not exactly. 

CASE STUDY: MEANINGFUL  
SOCIAL INTERACTIONS

EdgeRank didn't last long and was replaced by machine learn-
ing. In 2018, Facebook introduced a metric called “meaningful social 
interactions (MSIs)” to the machine learning system. The stated goal 

was to decrease the presence of media and brand content in favor of friends-
and-family content.58 Here is my best understanding of how the algorithm 
worked, pieced together from Facebook’s own high-level descriptions and 
low-level details in the Haugen documents.59

MSI(user, item) =	 affinity(user, poster) *
	 Σint-type P(user, item, int-type) *

	 Weight[int-type]

The formula calculates a meaningful social interaction score for each 
item that could be shown to a given user. As before, the feed is created by 
ordering available posts roughly by decreasing MSI score, but with tweaks 
for things like diversity. P(user, item, int-type) is the predicted probability 
that the user will have a specific type of interaction (such as liking or com-
menting) with the given item. These probabilities are predicted using a 
machine-learned model. The probability calculation is the workhorse of the 
algorithm and is where the sophistication of the system resides (for exam-
ple, if Facebook were to use matrix factorization, it would be to calculate 
these probabilities). The MSI formula computes a weighted sum of those 
probabilities; there is a manually defined set of weights for each interaction 
such as liking or commenting, which we’ll discuss in a moment. Finally, the 
MSI formula adjusts the result based on the affinity of the user to the poster.

There are fewer knobs for engineers to tweak here than in EdgeRank, 
and the core logic—the engagement probability calculation—is handled via 

30 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



machine learning. There are no longer manual weights for item types like 
photos or videos. If some types of content are more engaging than others, 
that will be automatically learned from the data—in fact, it will be learned 
on a per-user level, so that the algorithm may prefer photos for one user and 
events for another. 

Taking this logic to its natural conclusion, there should be no need to 
manually adjust the formula by affinity. If users like to see content from 
friends over brands, the algorithm should be able to learn that—again, at 
a granular, per-user level that cannot be achieved by manual tweaking of 
weights. Why, then, does the formula use affinity scores? It appears to be an 
explicit attempt to fight the logic of engagement optimization, manually pro-
gramming in a preference for friends-and-family content even at the expense 
of short-term engagement with the aim of increasing long-term satisfaction, 
which the algorithm can’t measure.

PLAYING WHAC-A-MOLE WITH HANDS TIED 
BEHIND THEIR BACKS

It is debatable how much control engineers have over the effects of 
recommendation algorithms. My view is that they have very little. Let me 
illustrate with an example. In 2019, Facebook realized that viral posts 

were much more likely to contain misinformation or many other types of 
harmful content.60 (The correlation between virality and misinformation is 
also consistent with some research.)61 In other words, the shift to Meaningful 
Social Interactions had had the opposite of the intended effect: Content that 
provoked outrage and stoked division was gaining in reach instead. This was 
a key point of Frances Haugen’s testimony and has been extensively written 
about in the press.62 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 31



Figure 7: Interaction type weights and affinity multipliers for the Meaningful 
Social Interactions formula, via WSJ.63

A look at the table of weights for the MSI formula instantly reveals a 
potential reason for this. Resharing a post was weighted 30 times higher than 
liking it. The logic behind such a high weight is presumably to identify posts 
that were potentially viral and boost them even further.

After recognizing the unintended consequence of this weight decision, 
in 2020, Facebook dropped the reshare weight all the way to 1.5. But the 
weight for comments remained high. Whereas reshares and comments were 
grouped in a single category in 2018, they no longer were. So here’s how the 
weights looked in the first half of 2020. (There are few documents after this 
date in the Facebook files, and some minor changes are mentioned, but it 
is not clear whether and when there were any major weight updates after 
this date.)

32 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



Table 3: Interaction-type weights for the MSI formula in 2020.

Comments are overwhelmingly more important than any other type of 
interaction. Although it doesn’t seem to have been reported in the press, a 
likely consequence of these weights is that posts that implicitly or explicitly 
encouraged users to comment would have done even better after this change. 
And one reliable way to encourage people to comment is to post divisive 
content. Fox News had long employed this strategy. According to one former 
social media producer: “We would intentionally post content that would be 
divisive and elicit a lot of comments.”64

In short, it’s quite possible that just as Facebook’s attempt to clamp 
down on harmful content by moving to MSI backfired, its 2020 attempt to fix 
the problems with MSI also backfired. We can’t know for sure unless there are 
more revelations of internal documents. It shouldn’t be surprising, though, 
that attempting to steer a system of such extraordinary complexity using so 
few knobs would prove challenging.

I think there are two driving principles behind Facebook engineers’ 
thinking that explain why they’ve left themselves with so little control. I’m 
basing this on the design of the algorithm, the internal discussions about 
it in the Haugen documents, and the generally prevalent views on these 
questions among technologists. 

First, the system is intended to be neutral towards all content, except 
for policy violating or “borderline” content. To be sure, the list of types of 
content, users, and groups that are algorithmically demoted seems to be ever 
growing. The January 6 committee’s draft report on social media lists dozens 
of such actions that Facebook took leading up to and following the 2020 U.S. 
election (which was apparently not enough!).65 But no matter how much 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 33



content is demoted, it is not the same as having a thesis about what types of 
content should thrive on the platform, and designing around such a thesis.66

There are obvious and important arguments in favor of neutrality. After 
all, platforms are already under attack from all sides of the political aisle 
for supposedly being biased. But neutrality is hard to achieve in practice. 
Many biases are emergent effects of these systems. One is the rich-get-richer 
effect: Those who already have a high reach, whether earned or not, are 
rewarded with more reach.67 For example, the top 1% of authors on Twitter 
receive 80% of tweet views.68 Another is demographic bias: Users’ tendency 
to preferentially engage with some types of posters may be amplified by the 
algorithm.69 Ultimately, designing for neutrality ends up rewarding those 
who are able to hack engagement or benefit from social biases.

The second main driving principle is that the algorithm knows best. 
This principle and the neutrality principle reinforce each other. Deferring 
the policy (about which content to amplify) to the data means that the engi-
neers don’t have to have a point of view about it. And that neutrality in turn 
provides the algorithm with cleaner data from which to learn.

The algorithm-knows-best principle means that the same optimization 
is applied to all types of speech: entertainment, educational information, 
health information, news, political speech, commercial speech, art, and 
more.70 If users want more or less of some types of content, the thinking goes, 
the algorithm will deliver that. The same applies to any other way in which a 
human designer might try to tweak the system to make the user experience 
better. For example, suppose someone suggested to a Facebook engineer that 
posts related to the user’s job or career, posts from colleagues, etc. should 
have slightly higher priority during work hours, with posts about parties or 
entertainment prioritized during evenings or weekends. The engineer might 
respond along these lines: “But who are we to make that decision? Maybe 
people actually secretly want to goof off during work. If so, the algorithm 
will let them do that. But if the policy you’re asking for is actually what users 
want, then the algorithm will automatically discover it.”

The level of adherence to these principles can be seen in how timid 
the deviations are. For example, in early 2021, Facebook trained machine 
learning models to classify posts as “good for the world” or “bad for the 

34 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



world.”71 The training data was generated by surveying users. Facebook 
found that posts with higher reach were more likely to be “bad for the world,” 
so it wanted to algorithmically demote them. The first model that it built 
successfully suppressed objectionable content but led to a decrease in how 
often users opened the app—incidentally, an example of the ills of engage-
ment optimization. So it deployed a tweaked, weaker model. What’s most 
interesting to me about this is that, again, there’s no articulated theory of 
what is good for the world. Even that judgment is delegated to the crowd. I 
mention this not to necessarily criticize it, but to point out that it is on one end 
of the spectrum of available governance approaches, and very different from 
traditional media. Even within the realm of democratic governance, there 
are other possible models that involve fewer people but more deliberation 
compared to crowdsourcing.72

HOW ENGAGEMENT OPTIMIZATION FAILS  
USERS, CREATORS, AND SOCIETY

Many of the familiar pathologies of social media are, in my 
view, relatively direct consequences of engagement optimization. 
Understanding these connections will help us appreciate why 

reforms have proved difficult. The issues I identify in this section will persist 
even if companies improve transparency around their algorithms, invest 
more resources into content moderation, and provide users more control 
over what they see.

Let’s start with how engagement optimization fails users. Behavioral 
data—data on past engagement—is the critical raw material for recommen-
dation engines. The more data, the better the model is able to drive future 
engagement. So platforms emphasize feedback types that are more frequent. 
An example of this viewpoint from YouTube researchers in 2016: “Although 
explicit feedback mechanisms exist on YouTube (thumbs up/down, in-prod-
uct surveys, etc.) we use the implicit feedback of watches to train the model, 
where a user completing a video is a positive example. This choice is based 
on the orders of magnitude more implicit user history available. ...”73 This 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 35



is generally true across platforms, and over time, there has been a shift to 
“implicit” forms of feedback where the user action is minimal.74 On TikTok, 
users don’t need to select videos, just swipe.

The problem with implicit feedback is that it relies on our unconscious, 
automatic, emotional reactions: “System 1,” rather than our rational and 
deliberative mode of thought: “System 2.”75 A rich literature in behavioral 
economics documents the biases that System 1 suffers from. A TikTok user 
might swipe past a video by a medical expert reminding people to get a flu 
shot because she doesn’t look like the stereotype of a medical expert, and 
dwell on an angry video that they enjoy in the moment but regret later. By 
default, implicit-feedback-based feeds cater to our basest impulses.

From the perspective of creators, the most salient fact about engagement 
optimization is that it is a fickle overlord. If a creator puts out two pieces of 
content, one of which the data shows to be 10% more engaging than the 
other, the algorithm will reflect that in its recommendations and will com-
pound that difference over time. The consequence might be that the first 
piece of content has a hundred times the reach of the other. The high vari-
ance and unpredictability of reach means that commercial content creators 
face an uncertain revenue stream on algorithmic platforms. They adapt in 
various ways. Producing a large volume of content, even if lower quality, can 
increase the chances that at least a few will go viral each month and smooth 
out the revenue stream.76 

Still, an environment where everyone is looking for the next viral hit 
makes it hard for creators to be authentic. It leaves little room for those who 
are uninterested in popularity and simply want to have a conversation with 
a small group of people. The increase in distribution of viral content comes 
at the expense of suppressing more boutique types of content. Note that one 
appeal of non-algorithmic platforms such as Substack is the reliability and 
up-front predictability of revenue.77 

Let’s turn to harm to society: specifically, harms that cannot be under-
stood as the aggregate of harms to individuals. In other words, while it may 
be true that social media use harms mental health, I view that as a harm to 
individuals. The difference matters. The familiar complaints about social 
media, such as privacy and exploitation, aren’t particularly compelling if 

36 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



viewed as transactional harms to individuals, but far more serious from a 
collective, structural perspective.78

I want to highlight one particular set of harms to society, pertaining to 
institutions and markets: institutions like science, journalism, public health, 
and art, and markets like restaurants or travel. Each of these institutions 
and markets has been reshaped to varying degrees through algorithmic 
platforms. This is most obvious in the case of news, which is heavily reliant 
on platforms for distribution. It is starting to happen with science and schol-
arship, as social media has become a primary way for many of us to learn of 
our peers’ work. While success on platforms might not affect whether a paper 
is accepted for publication, it does affect which papers will be heard about 
and built upon. As for the labor market, people often hear of job postings 
on social media.

Each institution has a set of values that make it what it is, such as fair-
ness in journalism, accuracy in science, and aesthetic values in art. Markets 
have notions of quality, such as culinary excellence in restaurants and pro-
fessional skill in a labor market. Over decades or centuries, they have built up 
internal processes that rank and sort what is produced, such as peer review. 
But social media algorithms are oblivious to these values and these signals 
of quality. They reward unrelated factors, based on a logic that makes sense 
for entertainment but not for any other domain. 

As a result, I argue that social media platforms are weakening institu-
tions by undermining their quality standards and making them less trust-
worthy. While this has been widely observed in the case of news,79 my claim 
is that every other institution is being affected, even if not to the same degree. 
TikTok, best known for viral dances, might not seem like much of a threat to 
science. Maybe it won’t be. But historically, we’ve observed that platforms 
start out as entertainment and gradually move into every sphere of speech.80 
That’s already measurably true of TikTok for domains like politics: In a recent 
paper I co-authored, we counted over 2.5 million U.S. political videos by over 
60,000 creators in a 45-day period preceding the 2020 election.81

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 37



THE LIMITS OF DATA SCIENCE

Platform companies are well aware of these limitations. They’ve 
made occasional, rudimentary efforts to fix some of these issues—like 
Facebook’s “bad for the world” classifier. Why haven’t they done 

more? The most obvious explanation is that it hurts the bottom line. There’s 
certainly some truth to this. The reliance on subconscious, automatic deci-
sion making is entirely intentional; it’s called “frictionless design.” The fact 
that users might sometimes exercise judgment and resist their impulses is 
treated as a problem to be solved.82

I don’t think this is the entire answer, though. The consistent negative 
press has genuinely hurt platforms’ reputation, and there have been internal 
efforts to do better. So it’s worth talking about another limitation. Most of 
the drawbacks of engagement optimization are not visible in the dominant 
framework of platform design, which places outsize importance on finding 
a quantitative, causal relationship between changes to the algorithm and 
their effects. To explain what I mean, consider four reasons why someone 
might quit a social media app that they just took up.

1.	The user consistently fails to get content recommendations that they 
found engaging enough. This is, of course, exactly what engagement 
optimization is designed to prevent.

2.	The user got recommendations that were engaging in the moment 
but didn’t make them feel good once they put down the app after a 
couple of hours. Companies are pretty good at optimizing against 
this outcome as well. A simple way to test an algorithm change is to 
A/B test it: that is, deploy it to a randomly selected subset of users. 
Then track how many of those users open the app on a given day, 
compared to a control group. Algorithms called contextual bandits 
automate some of the work of doing these A/B tests and tweaking 
the system based on their outcome.

3.	The user enjoys the app, but over a period of six months, they realize 
that while it’s a good source of entertainment, they haven’t found it 
beneficial in any long-term way. This is tricky to measure! Of course, 

38 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



platforms pay close attention to metrics like retention and churn, 
but countless changes are made over a period of six months, and 
without an A/B test, there’s no good way to tell which changes were 
responsible for users quitting. And in most cases, you can’t run an 
A/B test for six months: That’s too slow. Still, for a few particularly 
important design decisions, platforms do employ long-running A/B 
tests. For example, Facebook found that showing more notifications 
increased engagement in the short term but had the opposite effect 
over a period of a year.83

4.	The user’s experience of the app as an individual is, on balance, 
positive at all time scales, but there has been a barrage of negative 
press about its harmful effects on other people and for democracy. 
The disconnect could be because individual users don’t necessarily 
internalize societal harms: Users who consume election misinforma-
tion may actually love it. Or it could be because some harms such as 
privacy are structural and cannot be understood as the aggregate of 
individual, transactional harms.84 At any rate, our hypothetical user 
quits because they decide that they don’t want to help monetize the 
app given what they have heard about it in the press. 

Measuring this is impossible even in theory! Experimenting on users 
critically relies on the assumption that each user’s behavior is independent. 
Collective harms completely violate this assumption. Even if the platform 
were to run a yearslong A/B test, societal-scale harms such as undermining 
democracy affect all users (and nonusers), so the churn in the experimental 
group wouldn’t necessarily be any higher than in the control group.

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 39



Table 4: Four levels at which platform algorithms may have effects, and ways 
in which those effects can potentially be measured. CTR = Click Through Rate. 
MSI = Meaningful Social Interactions, Facebook’s engagement metric. DAU 
= Daily Active Users.

ALGORITHMS ARE NOT THE ENEMY

At empting response to this litany of problems is to suggest that 
we should go back to chronological feeds. But this confuses the 
category of algorithmic recommendations with a specific kind of 

algorithm, namely engagement optimization. Of course, the only recom-
mendation algorithms we’ve been exposed to are those that optimize for 
engagement, so it’s hard to imagine any other kind. But to fail to do so would 
be to throw the baby out with the bathwater.

At their core, recommendation algorithms are a response to informa-
tion overload: There is far more information online that is relevant to one’s 
interests than one has time for. The problem is only getting worse. Chrono-
logical feeds were (barely) tenable a decade or two ago when user-generated 
online content was in its infancy. Today, offering only chronological feeds 
is not a realistic option for a mainstream platform that faces competitive 
pressures. Ranking algorithms are a practical necessity even in a purely 
subscription-based network, like Instagram a few years ago. The company 
has reported that by 2016, before it launched its algorithm, users missed 70% 
of all the posts in their feed.85 Today, Instagram has five times as many users 

40 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



as it did then, so the overload problem would likely be even worse. Far from 
a return to chronological feeds, platforms are facing enormous commercial 
pressures to make algorithms even more central to their operation. 

Search offers a useful analogy: Before search engines, people accessed 
online information through directories. I suspect that social media without 
recommendations will soon seem just as quaint if it doesn’t already.

Let’s also pause to consider the many benefits that algorithmic platforms 
have brought. The ability to go viral has enabled many creators, such as 
musicians and entertainers, to establish an initial livelihood on social media. 
This weakening of the power of gatekeepers has unleashed a creative energy 
that deserves to be celebrated.

Algorithmic recommendations excel at giving people niche content that 
they are interested in. Suppose I’m interested in learning about new restau-
rants in Princeton, New Jersey, where I live. What are my options? If I lived in 
a big city like New York City, there are many New York City foodie Instagram 
accounts I could follow. But Princeton is too small a market for maintaining 
a town foodie account to be worth anyone’s time. This is no problem for 
TikTok. Knowing that I enjoy content about Princeton and content about 
food is enough for it to recommend content about Princeton restaurants from 
various accounts, even if each of them mostly posts content I’m not interested 
in (like food in central New Jersey or activities in Princeton).

Finally, let’s keep in mind that “reverse chronological” is an algorithm, 
albeit a simple one. Chronological feeds are not normatively neutral: They 
are also subject to rich-get-richer effects, demographic biases, and the unpre-
dictability of virality. There is, unfortunately, no neutral way to design social 
media. Algorithmic recommendations could in fact be an opportunity to 
actively counteract harmful patterns of information propagation. 

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS

For all the ink that’s been spilled about social media algorithms, 
their role is only getting bigger. They’re displacing social networking 
as the predominant method of amplifying speech. At the same time, 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 41



they’re displacing traditional forms of content moderation as the predom-
inant method of suppressing speech. People interact with social media 
algorithms for several hours a day on average.86 Beyond social media, rec-
ommendation algorithms have made their way into education (Coursera), 
finance (Robinhood), and many other domain-specific apps.          

Yet recommendation algorithms remain poorly understood by the pub-
lic. This knowledge gap has consequences ranging from mythologizing 
algorithms to policy stumbles.87 Of course, algorithms aren’t the whole 
picture: Just as important is the design of social media, platform processes, 
their incentive structures and, most critically, human-algorithm interactions. 
Demanding much more transparency from platform companies—and not 
being easily swayed by their arguments about competitive risks—will go a 
long way toward improving our understanding of all these aspects of social 
media.

Let’s imagine a future where children learn how platform algorithms 
work, just as they learn about other types of civic infrastructure and grow 
up empowered to participate in a healthier way on algorithmic platforms, 
as well as to help govern them.

42 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



NOTES
1	 Dell Cameron et al., Facebook Papers Directo- Master Over Most of What You Watch, CNET (Jan. 10, 
ry, Gizmodo (Feb. 14, 2022), https://gizmodo.com/ 2018, 10:05 AM), https://www.cnet.com/tech/ser-
facebook-papers-how-to-read-1848702919 [https:// vices-and-software/youtube-ces-2018-neal-mohan/ 
perma.cc/6PL2-X8QQ]. [https://perma.cc/R5LD-JMNJ].

2 	 Donella H. Meadows, Thinking in Systems: A Prim- 12	 Kalley Huang & Mike Isaac, Instagram Rolls 
er (Chelsea Green Publishing, 2008). Back Some Product Changes After User Backlash., 

3	 Braess’s Paradox, Wikipedia (Dec. 29, 2022, 12:30 N.Y. Times (July 28, 2022), https://www.nytimes.

PM), https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Braess%27s_ com/2022/07/28/technology/instagram-revers-

paradox [https://perma.cc/X5HT-SDQY]. es-changes.html.

4	 Zeynep Tufekci, Twitter and Tear Gas: The Power 13	 Adam Mosseri, Shedding More Light on How In-

and Fragility of Networked Protest (Yale University stagram Works, Instagram (June 8, 2021), https://

Press, 2017). about.instagram.com/blog/announcements/shed-
ding-more-light-on-how-instagram-works [https://

5	 Jeremy A Frimer et al., Incivility Is Rising Among perma.cc/ZR9V-JW82].
American Politicians on Twitter, 14 Soc. Psych. & Per-
sonality Sci. (2023). 14	 Jameel Jaffer (@JameelJaffer), Twitter (Sept. 19, 

2022, 9:07 AM), https://twitter.com/jameeljaffer/sta-
6	 Nathan Matias & Lucas Wright, Impact Assess- tus/1571848466174713856; Joe Biden (@JoeBiden), 
ment of Human-Algorithm Feedback Loops (Just Tech. Twitter (Sept. 26, 2022, 4:15 PM), https://twitter.
Social Science Research Council, 2022), https:// com/joebiden/status/1574492776988917764?lang=
just-tech.ssrc.org/field-reviews/impact-assess- en.
ment-of-human-algorithm-feedback-loops/ [https://

15	 Sharad Goel et al., The Structural Virality of Online 
perma.cc/65Z2-AVUX].

Diffusion, 62 Mgmt. Sci. 180, 181 (2016).
7	 While friending/following is about more than 

16	 Id. at 182-83.
content propagation, I’ve put friend recommenda-
tion under that group to keep the categorization 17	 Travis Martin et al., Exploring Limits to Predic-
simple. tion in Complex Social Systems, Cornell Univ., ArX-

iv (2016), https://arxiv.org/abs/1602.01013 [https://
8	 Never Miss Important Tweets from People You 

perma.cc/2N44-L45W].
Follow, Twitter (Feb. 10, 2016), https://blog.twitter.
com/official/en_us/a/2016/never-miss-important- 18	 Benjamin Guinaudeau et al., Fifteen Seconds of 
tweets-from-people-you-follow.html [https://perma. Fame: TikTok and the Supply Side of Social Video, 4 
cc/WG3J-8P8M]. Computational Commc’n Rsch. 463 (2022).

9	 Alex Hern, How TikTok’s Algorithm Made It a Suc- 19	 The authors of the structural virality paper uti-
cess: ‘It Pushes the Boundaries,’ The Guardian (Oct. lized access to the Twitter “Firehose” API, which is 
24, 2022, 1:00 AM), https://www.theguardian.com/ no longer available.
technology/2022/oct/23/tiktok-rise-algorithm-pop- 20	More visualizations of different accounts from 
ularity [https://perma.cc/NQ7C-9JPR]. different platforms are available at https://www.
10	 On mobile devices, the Discover feed appears cs.princeton.edu/~arvindn/distorted-speech/bub-
below the search box on Google.com, on the Chrome ble_chart/ [https://perma.cc/UJ7U-MPMU].
new tab page, and on the home screen on Android. It 21	 Tarleton Gillespie, Do Not Recommend? Reduc-
is not accessible on desktop devices. Google doesn’t tion as a Form of Content Moderation, 8 Soc. Media + 
seem to use the name Discover in the product itself Soc’y (2022).
and simply calls it “Google,” which is perhaps one 22	 Not all platforms use the term engagement to 
reason why so little has been written about it. describe what they optimize for. But I think it is fair 
11	 Joan E. Solsman, YouTube’s AI Is the Puppet to apply that term, as it is commonly (and flexibly) 

43



understood, to most major platforms. menders Work, Medium (Jan. 20, 2022), https://me-
23	 Julia Carrie Wong, Facebook Overhauls News dium.com/understanding-recommenders/how-plat-
Feed in Favor of ‘Meaningful Social Interactions,’ form-recommenders-work-15e260d9a15a [https://
The Guardian (Jan. 11, 2018. 9:31 PM), https://www. perma.cc/3WCQ-GCWK].
theguardian.com/technology/2018/jan/11/face- 34	 Amatriain & Basilico, supra note 31; James 
book-news-feed-algorithm-overhaul-mark-zucker- McInerney et al., Explore, Exploit, and Explain: 
berg [https://perma.cc/SED9-3NUV]. Personalizing Explainable Recommendations with 
24	 Smitha Milli et al., From Optimizing Engagement Bandits, ACM Digital Library (2018), https://static1.
to Measuring Value, Cornell Univ., ArXiv (2021), squarespace.com/static/5ae0d0b48ab7227d232c-
https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.12623 [https://perma. 2bea/t/5ba849e3c83025fa56814f45/1537755637453/
cc/YRH3-NTNR]. BartRecSys.pdf [https://perma.cc/GWC9-XRH8].

25	 Paul Covington et al., Deep Neural Networks for 35	 Sahin Cem Geyik et al., Fairness-Aware Ranking 
YouTube Recommendations (2016), https://static. in Search & Recommendation Systems with Applica-
googleusercontent.com/media/research.google. tion to LinkedIn Talent Search, Cornell Univ., ArXiv 
com/en//pubs/archive/45530.pdf [https://perma. (2019), https://arxiv.org/abs/1905.01989 [https://
cc/CU2L-4Z4K]. perma.cc/VY7U-2D4D].

26	 Eric Meyerson, YouTube Now: Why We Focus 36	 Arvind Narayanan, TikTok’s Secret Sauce, 
on Watch Time, YouTube Off. Blog (Aug. 10, 2012), Knight First Amend. Inst. at Colum. Univ. (Dec. 15, 
https://blog.youtube/news-and-events/youtube- 2022), https://knightcolumbia.org/blog/tiktoks-se-
now-why-we-focus-on-watch-time/ [https://perma. cret-sauce [https://perma.cc/5UYS-7HW5].
cc/82HQ-7WP6]. 37	 Dmitry Pashtukov, Inside Spotify’s Recommend-
27	 Ben Smith, How TikTok Reads Your Mind, er System: A Complete Guide to Spotify Recommen-
N.Y. Times, (Dec. 5, 2021), https://www.nytimes. dation Algorithms, Music Tomorrow Blog (Feb. 9, 
com/2021/12/05/business/media/tiktok-algorithm. 2022), https://www.music-tomorrow.com/blog/
html. how-spotify-recommendation-system-works-a-com-
28	 An Update on Our Work to Safeguard and Diver- plete-guide-2022 [https://perma.cc/4BNE-F7RG].
sify Recommendations, TikTok Newsroom (Dec. 16, 38	 Narayanan, supra note 36.
2021), https://newsroom.tiktok.com/en-us/an-up- 39	 Eytan Bakshy et al., Exposure to Ideologically Di-
date-on-our-work-to-safeguard-and-diversify-rec- verse News and Opinion on Facebook, 348 Sci. (2015); 
ommendations [https://perma.cc/S96X-HY34]. Ferenc Huszár et al., Algorithmic Amplification of 
29	 Guinaudeau et al., supra note 18. Politics on Twitter, 119 Proc. of Nat’l Acad. of Sci. 
30	Netflix Prize, Wikipedia (Feb. 21, 2023, 3:55 PM), (2022).
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Netflix_Prize [https:// 40	Venu Satuluri et al., SimClusters: Communi-
perma.cc/59LX-6NLQ]. ty-Based Representations for Heterogeneous Recom-
31	 Xavier Amatriain & Justin Basilico, Netflix Rec- mendations at Twitter, 26th ACM SIGKDD Int’l Conf. on 
ommendations: Beyond the 5 Stars (Part 1), Netflix Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (2020), https://
Tech. Blog (Apr. 6, 2012), https://netflixtechblog. dl.acm.org/doi/proceedings/10.1145/3394486 
com/netflix-recommendations-beyond-the-5-stars- [https://perma.cc/3RFK-RTXK].
part-1-55838468f429 [https://perma.cc/NZ4F-FUGY]. 41	 Tanya Dua, Never-Before-Seen TikTok Stats from 
32	 Alex Heath, Facebook is Changing Its Algorithm Leaked Presentations Show How It’s Trying To Lure 
To Take on TikTok, Leaked Memo Reveals, The Verge Adertisers to the Platform, Bus. Insider (2021), https://
(June, 15, 2022, 12:46 PM), https://www.theverge. www.businessinsider.com/tiktok-pitch-deck-shows-
com/2022/6/15/23168887/facebook-discovery-en- new-e-commerce-ads-2021-4 [https://perma.cc/
gine-redesign-tiktok [https://perma.cc/X9GF-8Y6Q]. L6RZ-45MS].
33	 Luke Thorburn et al., How Platform Recom- 42	 Lara Zarum, Some Viewers Think Netflix Is 

44 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



Targeting Them by Race. Here’s What to Know, 52	 Narayanan, supra note 36.
N.Y. Times (Oct. 23, 2018), https://www.nytimes. 53	 Alvaro M. Bedoya, Fed. Trade Comm’n, Address 
com/2018/10/23/arts/television/netflix-race-target- at the National Academy of Sciences, Engineering 
ing-personalization.html. & Medicine Meeting of the Committee on the Im-
43	 Traditionally, content and behavior correspond- pact of Social Media on the Health and Wellbeing of 
ed to two types of recommendation algorithms Children & Adolescents (Feb. 7, 2023), https://www.
called content filtering and collaborative filtering, ftc.gov/system/files/ftc_gov/pdf/national-acade-
but there is no reason to use only one type of signal, mies-speech-bedoya.pdf [https://perma.cc/42GH-
so the distinction has gradually become meaning- 95YY].
less. 54	 Shane Hegarty, In Using Ad Blockers and the De-
44	Clive Thompson, If You Liked This, You’re Sure To fault Age Setting, Google Thinks I’m 120+ with an Ear-
Love That, N.Y. Times (Nov. 21, 2008), https://www. wax Problem and Some Dodgy Interests, Times (Lon-
nytimes.com/2008/11/23/magazine/23Netflix-t.html. don) (Oct. 17, 2021), https://www.thetimes.co.uk/

45	 Id.; Greg Linden et al., Amazon.com Recommen- article/ad-blockers-default-age-setting-google-ads-

dations: Item-to-Item Collaborative Filtering, 7 earwax-problem-r9h0wq5md; Sarah Cooper (@
IEEE 

Internet Computing (2003). sarahcpr), Twitter (Oct. 25, 2020, 2:03 PM), https://
twitter.com/sarahcpr/status/1320425679410941953; 

46	For actual examples of surprising correlations Dave Ross, When Will Google Let Us Block Those 
in Netflix’s data, see Libby Plummer, This Is How Repulsive Toenail Fungus Ads? MyNorthwest.
Netflix’s Top-Secret Recommendation System Works, com (May 4, 2022, 6:26 AM), https://mynorthwest.
Wired UK (Aug. 22, 2017, 7:00 AM), https://www. com/3453078/ross-google-block-repulsive-toenail-
wired.co.uk/article/how-do-netflixs-algorithms- fungus-ads/ [https://perma.cc/8GTF-WSC6]. 
work-machine-learning-helps-to-predict-what-view-

55	 What Is a Successful Click-Through Rate for Ads? 
ers-will-like [https://perma.cc/8P3Z-DBF8].

Broadstreet Ads (June 23, 2022), https://broadstree-
47	 Robert M Bell et al., All Together Now: A Perspec- tads.com/successful-click-through-rate/ [https://
tive on the Netflix Prize, 23 Chance 24 (2010), https:// perma.cc/3WJU-NW3M].
chance.amstat.org/2010/02/netflix/ [https://perma.

56	 This is based on Facebook’s F8 developer con-
cc/BH4N-VGZV].

ference in 2010, as documented by a third party. Jeff 
48	Alex W. Palmer, How TikTok Became a Diplomatic Widman, EdgeRank (2010), http://edgerank.net/ 
Crisis, N.Y. Times (Dec. 20, 2022), https://www.ny- [https://perma.cc/CY4N-9NJV].
times.com/2022/12/20/magazine/tiktok-us-china-di-

57	 It isn’t clear if the inverse age dependence was 
plomacy.html.

linear or exponential, but the point stands either 
49	Confusingly, in the computer science literature, way.
embedding spaces are referred to as low-dimension-

58	 Mark Zuckerberg, Facebook (2018), https://www.
al because this is with reference to the number of facebook.com/zuck/posts/10104413015393571.
possible dimensions, which is equal to the number 
of users or posts. 59	 Cameron et al., supra note 1. 

50	Sally Goldman, Embeddings, Google Devs. (2022), 60	Max Reshare Depth Experiment (redacted for 
https://developers.google.com/machine-learning/ Congress), Documentcloud.org  (2019), https://
crash-course/embeddings/video-lecture [https:// www.documentcloud.org/documents/21602015-ti-
perma.cc/S67M-J84U]. er1_rank_pr_1119.

51	 Elena Cucu, [STUDY] TikTok Benchmarks: Per- 61	 Soroush Vosoughi et al., The Spread of True and 
formance Data and Stats Based on the Analysis of False News Online, 359 Sci. 1146 (2018); Michela Del 
616,409 TikTok Videos, Socialinsider Blog (Sept. Vicario et al., The Spreading of Misinformation On-
21, 2022), https://www.socialinsider.io/blog/tik- line, 113 Proc. of Nat’l Acad. of Scis. 554 (2016). 
tok-benchmarks/ [https://perma.cc/86T4-29T2]. 62	 Keach Hagey & Jeff Horwitz, Facebook Tried 

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 45



to Make Its Platform a Healthier Place. It Got An- music-recommendation-algorithms-are-unfair-
grier Instead., Wall St. J. (Sept. 15, 2021, 9:26 AM), to-female-artists-but-we-can-change-that-158016 
https://www.wsj.com/articles/facebook-algo- [https://perma.cc/7R56-R3SP].
rithm-change-zuckerberg-11631654215 [https:// 70	 There are a few small exceptions. For example, 
perma.cc/FE65-59YA]; Facebook Whistleblower after the 2020 U.S. elections, Facebook began exper-
Testifies on Protecting Children Online, C-SPAN (Oct. imenting with decreasing the amount of political 
5, 2021), https://www.c-span.org/video/?515042-1/ content in news feeds (Anna Stepanov, Reducing 
whistleblower-frances-haugen-calls-congress-reg- Political Content in News Feed, Meta Newsroom (Feb. 
ulate-facebook. 10, 2021), https://about.fb.com/news/2021/02/reduc-
63	 Hagey & Horwitz, supra note 62. ing-political-content-in-news-feed/ [https://perma.

64	David Uberti, How Fox News Dominates Facebook cc/AC3G-DP2U]). Later in 2021, the company made a 

in the Trump Era, VICE News (Apr. 29, 2019, 10:20 AM), more drastic attempt to demote all political content, 

https://www.vice.com/en/article/wjvdem/how- but this had the unanticipated effect of suppressing 

fox-news-dominates-facebook-in-the-trump-era high-quality news sources more than low-quality 

[https://perma.cc/8VKL-7FHT]. ones, and misinformation in fact rose (Jeff Horwitz 
et al., Facebook Wanted Out of Politics. It Was Messier 

65	 House Select Comm. to Investigate the Jan. Than Anyone Expected., Wall St. J. (Jan. 5, 2023, 9:51 
6th Attack on the U.S. Capitol, Social Media & the AM), https://www.wsj.com/articles/facebook-poli-
January 6th Attack on the U.S. Capitol: Summary of tics-controls-zuckerberg-meta-11672929976 [https://
Investigative Findings (Draft, 2023), https://www. perma.cc/R5MP-A2L2]).
washingtonpost.com/documents/5bfed332-d350-

71	 Kevin Roose et al., Facebook Struggles to Balance 
47c0-8562-0137a4435c68.pdf [https://perma.cc/

Civility and Growth, N.Y. Times (Jan. 7, 2021), https://
UG4Q-F42W].

www.nytimes.com/2020/11/24/technology/face-
66	For a detailed normative analysis of the difference book-election-misinformation.html.
between these approaches, see Seth Lazar, Lecture 

72	 Aviv Ovadya, Towards Platform Democracy: Poli-
2. Communicative Justice and the Distribution of At-

cymaking Beyond Corporate CEOs and Partisan Pres-
tention (Obert C. Tanner Lecture on Artificial Intel-

sure, Harv. Kennedy Sch., Belfer Ctr. for Sci. & Int’l 
ligence and Human Values, Jan. 18, 2023), https://

Affs. (Oct. 18, 2021) https://www.belfercenter.org/
write.as/sethlazar/cjda [https://perma.cc/BF6Q-

publication/towards-platform-democracy-policy-
HJML].

making-beyond-corporate-ceos-and-partisan-pres-
67	 Linhong Zhu & Kristina Lerman, Attention In- sure [https://perma.cc/46QE-ETMB].
equality in Social Media, Cornell Univ., ArXiv (Jan. 

73	 Covington et al., supra note 25.
26, 2016), https://arxiv.org/abs/1601.07200 [https://
perma.cc/72X9-M937]. 74	 Ben Thompson, Instagram, TikTok, and the Three 

Trends, Stratechery (Aug. 16, 2022), https://strat-
68	Tomo Lazovich et al., Measuring Disparate echery.com/2022/instagram-tiktok-and-the-three-
Outcomes of Content Recommendation Algorithms trends/ [https://perma.cc/8Q2E-WRGS].
with Distributional Inequality Metrics, 3 Patterns 
(2022), https://www.cell.com/action/doSearch?tex- 75	 Daniel Kahneman, Thinking, Fast and Slow (Mac-
t1=Measuring+Disparate+Outcomes+of+Conten- millan, 2011).
t+Recommendation+Algorithms+with+Distribu- 76	 For example, one TikTok creator says, “In my 
tional+Inequality+Metrics&field1=AllField&jour- experience you have to post 4-10 videos daily for one 
nalCode=patter&SeriesKey=patter [https://perma. to pop off and get some traction on TikTok.” Red-
cc/99S3-YHXU]. dit user Ded___Pixel,  Reddit (2022), https://www.
69	Christine Bauer & Andrés Ferraro, Music Recom- reddit.com/r/ColinAndSamir/comments/vwf9hf/
mendation Algorithms Are Unfair to Female Artists, comment/ifpkhqa/ [https://perma.cc/6QXL-8UC4].
but We Can Change That, The Conversation (Mar. 77	 Substack - A New Model for Publishing, https://
30, 2021, 8:58 AM), https://theconversation.com/ substack.com/going-paid [https://perma.cc/F6VE-

46 KNIGHT FIRST AMENDMENT INSTITUTE



8NJ7] (last visited Mar. 7, 2023). 83	 Analytics at Meta, Notifications: Why Less Is 
78	 Claire Benn & Seth Lazar, What’s Wrong with Au- More—How Facebook Has Geen Increasing Both 

tomated Influence, 52 Can. J. of Phil. 125 (2022). User Satisfaction and App Usage by Sending Only 
a Few Notifications, Medium (Dec. 19, 2022), https://

79	 Robyn Caplan & Danah Boyd, Isomorphism medium.com/@AnalyticsAtMeta/notifications-
Through Algorithms: Institutional Dependencies in why-less-is-more-how-facebook-has-been-increas-
the Case of Facebook, 5 Big Data & Soc’y (2018). ing-both-user-satisfaction-and-app-9463f7325e7d 
80	Anders Olof Larsson, The Rise of Instagram as [https://perma.cc/4E6A-ZZDM].
a Tool for Political Communication: A Longitudinal 84	Benn & Lazar, supra note 78. 
Study of European Political Parties and Their Fol-

85	 Mosseri, supra note 13. 
lowers, New Media & Soc’y (2021), https://journals.
sagepub.com/doi/epub/10.1177/14614448211034158; 86	Daily Time Spent on Social Networking by Internet 
Sam Bestvater et al., Politics on Twitter: One-Third Users Worldwide from 2012 to 2022, Statista, https://

of Tweets from U.S. Adults Are Political, Pew Rsch. www.statista.com/statistics/433871/daily-social-me-

Ctr. (June 16, 2022), https://www.pewresearch.org/ dia-usage-worldwide/ [https://perma.cc/U2FH-

politics/2022/06/16/politics-on-twitter-one-third-of- F9P4] (last visited Mar. 7, 2023).

tweets-from-u-s-adults-are-political/ [https://perma. 87	 Kelley Cotter et al., In FYP We Trust: The Divine 
cc/8NVP-BPT8]. Force of Algorithmic Conspirituality, 16 Int’l J. of Com-

mc’n 2911 (2022); Daphne Keller, Amplification and 
81	 Orestis Papakyriakopoulos et al., How Algo-

Its Discontents: Why Regulating the Reach of Online 
rithms Shape the Distribution of Political Advertis- Content is Hard, 21-05 Knight First Amend. Inst. at 
ing: Case Studies of Facebook, Google, and TikTok, 

Colum. Univ. (June 8, 2021), https://knightcolum-
Cornell Univ., ArXiv (July 13, 2022), https://arxiv.org/ bia.org/content/amplification-and-its-discontents 
abs/2206.04720 [https://perma.cc/LXM5-6QK4]. [https://perma.cc/23KP-27GT].
82	 Sam Lessin (@lessin), Twitter (Aug. 9, 
2022, 8:49 AM), https://twitter.com/lessin/sta-
tus/1556986127785115648.

UNDERSTANDING SOCIAL MEDIA RECOMMENDATION ALGORITHMS 47






About the Author
Arvind Narayanan is a professor of computer science at Princeton Uni-
versity, the incoming director of Princeton’s Center for Information Technol-
ogy Policy, and the 2022-2023 visiting senior research scientist at the Knight 
First Amendment Institute. He also led the Princeton Web Transparency and 
Accountability Project, which focused on uncovering how companies collect 
and use our personal information. Narayanan co-created a massive open 
online course and textbook on bitcoin and cryptocurrency technologies, 
which has been used in over 150 courses worldwide. His recent work has 
shown how machine learning reflects cultural stereotypes, and his doctoral 
research showed the fundamental limits of de-identification. Narayanan is a 
recipient of the Presidential Early Career Award for Scientists and Engineers, 
twice recipient of the Privacy Enhancing Technologies Award, and thrice 
recipient of the Privacy Papers for Policy Makers Award.

Acknowledgments
I’m grateful to Eric Chen, Alex Engler, Katy Glenn Bass, Jameel Jaffer, Sayash 
Kapoor, Soham Mehta, Roy Rinberg, and Deb Roy for feedback on a draft.

© 2023, Arvind Narayanan.

About the Knight First Amendment Institute
The Knight First Amendment Institute at Columbia University defends the 
freedoms of speech and the press in the digital age through strategic litiga-
tion, research, and public education. It promotes a system of free expression 
that is open and inclusive, that broadens and elevates public discourse, and 
that fosters creativity, accountability, and effective self-government.

knightcolumbia.org

Design: Point Five
Illustration: ©Emilie Flamme

49