C1: Introductory course

Nume Prenume

Assoc. Prof. Arabela BRICIU

General description:
Specialized discipline

Number of credits: 5

(2 hours course + 2 hours seminar) x 14 weeks

Self-study hours: 69/ (study according to course
material, readings and notes, seminar work, homework
and projects)

Course description. It's about...
◘ communication process in social networks, trends in social media
◘ Sociability and socialisation
◘ identity and interaction in social media (SM) [individualisation vs. deindividualisation].
◘ digital culture - participatory culture
◘ Media globalisation and social change [implications of SM]
◘ how we (objectively) research and analyse SM [critical thinking]
◘ Listening and tracking SM content

It is NOT about ...
◘ how to manage your accounts or optimise your profile on the various SM
platforms
◘ how you can attract more people to follow you
◘ how to conduct SM marketing

OBIECTIVES

◘ Knowledge and understanding of concepts, theories,
paradigms and models used in the analysis of social
media communication
▪ Define and understand concepts, theories, paradigms
and methods of communication sciences to understand
the development and use of SM.
▪ Handling communication from the perspective of
specific social media parameters.
▪ Identify the impact of SM on the public sphere and
specific social phenomena;
▪ Understand the role of SM in developing organisations
and in relationships and interactions between
individuals.

Competences acquired
◘ To identify and use the language and expertise in communication
sciences to understand the use and operation of SM (the content
creation and tracking) by means of class discussions, seminar
activities and the final project.
◘ To understand the various methodological approaches that can be
used in the study of SM - by course discussions, seminar applications
and through course work and discussion of the required and
recommended bibliography.

◘ To understand the psychosocial effects of SM by following the course
and the compulsory bibliography and through class discussion.
◘ To be able to discuss SM and its role at a personal and organisational
level using expert language and critical thinking.

What is Social Media? Impact in the social sciences;
Conditions for development. History of Social Media
vs. New Media. Social Media vs. Social Networking
Sociability, social capital and social ties. Social
networks (types of networks, theories of network
ties, indicators for measuring cohesion and density in
a network, network information distribution)

Digitization of culture. Participatory culture.
Spreadable media.

Virtual communities. The need for affiliation and
building online groups. Identity in the online
environment. Psychosocial implications.

Research about SM. Socio-cultural particularities and
implications on different SM platforms.

Implications of Big Data and AI in SM.

TOPICS

ASSESSMENT and ... expectations

◘ Course activity 15%
◘ Seminar activity 20%
◘ Exam (written or grid test) 45%
◘ Research project 20%

This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-ND

Social media:
◘

The term is frequently used in everyday conversations and by journalists.

Social media:

◘ ◘overuse of the term
◘ ◘controversies

CBS News- Is social media dying? (2.09. 2023)

• https://youtu.be/cAL84EIZJsM?si=EC-7--DgwZbkWFm7

ABC News: Does social media negatively impact teen
mental health? (9.09.2023 )

https://youtu.be/gnEpRDh4Y2A?si=7rhzqrAmorQK8mpr

Digital Nation (2010); Screenagers (2023)

• https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/frontline/film/digitalnat
ion/
• https://youtu.be/s9Kp6s_PK3k?si=guKLBIB1ueg53
Wuq
• https://www.screenagersmovie.com

Teens, Social Media, and Technology (full
documentary) | FRONTLINE (2019)

https://youtu.be/JqamKb7gTWY?si=b5w7l0TVulzNGsMg

https://youtu.be/rooEBjZWpDc?si=y5VcAwsb3xDpAsi6

https://youtu.be/bN4MNdCAnWA?si=7FMDD
RvmAowczpW-

Electronic
Media

Digital
Media

New
Media

Social
Media

What is Social Media?

SOCIAL

MEDIA

Lat. sociālis
DEX ’09: (adj) Created by society, belonging
to society; relating to the life of people in
society, their relations in society or to
society; relating to human society
Cambridge Dictionary: (adj)
(1) relating to society and living together in
an
organized
way
/
(2)
relating
to
activities
in
which
you meet and spend time with
other people and that happen during
the time when you are not working:

Lat. media (sg. medium)
conceptual and linguistic ambiguity
Coman (2007, p. 23):
„<<media>> is either the medium, or
the technique, or the sum of the
institutions, or all of them in one place,
through which messages are circulated,
in an increasingly rapid way, over ever
larger geographical areas, to ever larger
conglomerates of people".

What is social?
Actions, facts, togetherness - cohabitation,
interdependence

• Social Action - Max Weber, Talcott Parsons
• Action is social if it takes into account and is oriented towards the behaviour of others
(symbolic-reciprocal interaction)

• Social fact - Émile Durkheim
• "a category of facts which have very special characteristics: they consist of ways of
acting, thinking and feeling, external to the individual and endowed with a power of
constraint by virtue of which they are imposed upon him." (2002, p.37)

• Isn't the media (mass media) in its entirety social?

• MASS- MEDIA -->NEW MEDIA -> SOCIAL MEDIA

New technologies
Institutions through
enabling mass
which mass
communication takes communication via the
Internet
place - traditional
channels

Participatory culture you can be both a
source of information
and audience

Van Dijck, 2013- The culture of connectivity: A
critical history of social media
• „The very word ‘social’ associated with media implies that platforms
are user centered and that they facilitate communal activities, just as
the term ‘participatory’ emphasizes human collaboration. Indeed,
social media can be seen as online facilitators or enhancers of human
networks – webs of people that promote connectedness as a social
value” (p, 11).
• „As a result of the interconnection of platforms, a new infrastructure
emerged: an ecosystem of connective media with a few large and
many small players. The transformation from networked
communication to ‘platformed’ sociality, and from a participatory
culture to a culture of connectivity”(p. 4).

