C2: Social Media - definitions and general aspects

Nume Prenume

Assoc.Prof. Arabela BRICIU, PhD.

• The process by which we learn to become
members of society - by internalising society's
norms and values and learning social roles.

Socialisation

• Permanent adaptation

• Integration of the individual into social
structures
• Is achieved and developed through interaction

Sociality
?
Sociability

Sociability
Sociable individual: shows a willingness to
establish and maintain social relationships with
peers.
Sociability: the permanent ability of people to live
in a group - mutual obligation
"Man is by nature a social animal." (Aristotle in
Politics)
"Remove sociability, and you destroy the union of
the human race" (Seneca in On Benefactions)
Sociability: the totality of an individual's personal
relationships, taking into account their form;
It refers to the network that supports it: = gr. philia
(the bond that maintains unity between members of
a group)
"it is the game in the course of which we <<do>> as if
all were equal" (Simmel, 1917) - the playful form of
socialisation (through which social units are formed)

Sociability
• "Sociability is ... a positive type of relationship with actual or potential
benefits for all actors involved". (Sandu, 2003, p.15)

• Sociability is relational and based on phenomena of association, social
bonding
Attitude
Type

• Sociability

Bond

of private/semiprivate space

Networks of friends
Networks of
interest/cooperation

Friendship-oriented
trustworthy
cooperative

of public space

Integration into associations
Participation in public actions
and events

Tolerance
Acceptance
Integration

https://youtu.be/0jA5B32MP98?si=jOvEgy9zS
IOn5cf9

More about the project on: https://www.ucl.ac.uk/why-we-post

https://uclpress.co.uk/book/how-the-world-changed-social-media/

Miller et. al, 2016, p.3 (How the World Changed Social Media)

How do we define Social Media?
Interdisciplinary perspectives

Social media is the colonization of the space between traditional
broadcast and private dyadic communication, providing people
with a scale of group size and degrees of privacy that we have
termed “scalable sociality.” (Miller et al., 2016, p.19)

Evolution of Social
Media Definitions
and Applications
Early Usage:

• The term "social media" first appeared
in 1994 on Tokyo's online platform,
Matisse.
Growth Over Time:
• Significant increase in both the number
of platforms and active users.
Key Applications:
• Communication: Facilitating user
interactions.
• Content Sharing: Enabling distribution
of user-generated content.
• Collaboration: Supporting cooperative
projects and discussions.

Aichner, T., Grünfelder, M., Maurer, O., & Jegeni, D. (2021). Twenty-Five
Years of Social Media: A Review of Social Media Applications and
Definitions from 1994 to 2019. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social
Networking, 24(4), 215-222.

Extensive but simplistic:
• “those that facilitate online communication, networking, and/or
collaboration” (Russo, Watkins, Kelly & Chan, 2008 p. 22).
• “a group of Internet-based applications that build on the ideological
and technological foundations of Web 2.0, and that allow the creation
and exchange of User Generated Content” (Kaplan & Haenlein, 2010,
p. 61)

DEFINITIONS

• Social media” simply serve as a “label for digital technologies that
allow people to connect, interact, produce and share content” (Lewis,
2010, p. 2).
• Social networking sites typically provide users with a profile space,
facilities for uploading content (e.g., photos, music), messaging in
various forms, and the ability to make connections to other people.
(Joinson, 2008)

General:
• “(a) the information infrastructure and tools used to produce and
distribute content; (b) the content that takes the digital form of
personal messages, news, ideas, and cultural products; and (c) the
people, organizations, and industries that produce and consume digital
content.” (Howards & Parks, 2012, p. 362)

...
• „Social media is the latest buzzword in a long line of buzzwords. It is often used to describe the
collection of software that enables individuals and communities to gather, communicate, share,
and in some cases collaborate or play. In tech circles, social media has replaced the earlier fave
‘social software’. Academics still tend to prefer terms like ‘computer-mediated communication’
or ‘computer-supported co-operative work’ to describe the practices that emerge from these
tools and the old skool academics might even categorize these tools as ‘groupwork’ tools. Social
media is driven by another buzzword: ‘user-generated content’ or content that is contributed
by participants rather than editors” (boyd, 2009).

• „Social media indicate a shift from HTML-based linking practices of the open web to liking and
recommendation, which happen inside closed systems. Web 2.0 has three distinguishing
features: it is easy to use, it facilitates sociality, and it provides users with free publishing and
production platforms that allow them to upload content in any form, be it pictures, videos, or
text” (Lovink, 2011, p.5).
• ”… programmers these days loosely glue everything together with code. Connect persons to
data objects to persons. That’s the social today” (Lovink, 2012, p.11).

...
• Since at least 2004, the internet, and
more specifically the web, has witnessed a
notorious and controversial shift away from
the model of the static web page towards a
social web or Web 2.0 model where the
possibilities of users to interact with the
web have multiplied. It has become much
easier for a layperson to publish and share
texts, images and sounds. A new topology
of distribution of information has emerged,
based in ‘real’ social networks, but also
enhanced by casual and algorithmic
connections” (Terranova & Donovan, 2013,
p. 297).

• Social media are Internet-based channels that allow users to
opportunistically interact and selectively self-present, either in real-time
or asynchronously, with both broad and narrow audiences who derive
value from user-generated content and the perception of interaction with
others. (Carr& Hayes, 2015, p. 50)

Table 1: Adaptation of contemporary examples based on the above definition, according to Carr and Hayes, 2015,
p.52

Social media is media that is designed
for and centered around social
interaction. It is commonly associated
with a conglomeration of web-based
technologies and services such as
blogs, wikis, media-sharing services,
collaborative editing tools, and social
networking services that enable and
empower users to communicate,
interact, edit, and share content in a
social environment (Bertot, Jaeger, &
Grimes, 2012, p. 82).

Social network sites are web-based services
that allow individuals to
(a)

construct a public or semi-public
profile within a bounded system,

(b) articulate a list of other users with
whom they share a connection, and
(c)

view and traverse their list of
connections and those made by others
within the system.

(boyd & Ellison, 2007, p.211).

A social network site is a networked communication platform in
which participants (a) have uniquely identifiable profiles that
consist of user-supplied content, content provided by other users,
and/or system-level data; (b) can publicly articulate connections
that can be viewed and traversed by others; and (c) can consume,
produce, and/or interact with streams of user-generated content
provided by their connections on the site. (Ellison & boyd, 2013,
p. 152)

Social Networking Sites versus Social Media
Castells (2009): SNS allow a form of mass communication of the self through which
individuals can learn a new creative autonomy.
Stiegler (2009): process of individualisation and public expression - factor of
emancipation/empowerment and opposition/resistance.
SNS

SM

Interaction --> communication

Interaction --> diffusion (spreading content)

Interpersonal communication<->

„Medium is the message” McLuhan
Media platforms

Public platforms based on individuals interconnected
by common interests/purposes

Spread, share and brake information
Wide audience

Most often they overlap

+ Quick interaction, we choose who we interact with, we receive information,
keep in touch with acquaintances, personal promotion, share content

- No anonymity, harassment, pranks, manipulation, time-consuming

• The eventual success of new technology relies upon both its first-time
adoption (initial use) and the subsequent usage behaviour (continued
usage) of the users. Continued usage behaviour by an individual depends
upon four pillars:
• initial adoption, i.e., the effect of current belief evaluation on current
use behaviour;
• sequential belief updating mechanisms, i.e., the effect of current belief
evaluations on subsequent belief evaluations
• feedback mechanisms, i.e., the effect of current use behaviour on
subsequent belief evaluations; and
• habit, i.e., the effect of current use behaviour on subsequent use
behaviour (Kesharwani, 2019, p.3).
• Each time users are exposed to new technology, they develop beliefs about
the use of the system, such as ease of use and safety confection, and on
these beliefs, they develop their usage behaviour.

• Social media affordances are the
perceived actual or imagined properties
of social media, emerging through the
relation of technological, social, and
contextual, that enable and constrain
specific uses of the platform

Understanding
Social Media
Affordances

Affordances in Social Media:
• Features that enable specific user
interactions and behaviors.
• Ronzhyn, Cardenal, and Batlle Rubio
(2022): examples of affordances include
• Visibility
• Editability
• Persistence:
• Association:

The affordances that shape
mediated environments and that
SM creates
❖They create opportunities and
challenges
❖4 Affordances of networked
publics:
❑persistence: the durability
of online expressions and
content;
❑visibility: the potential
audience who can bear
witness;
❑spreadability: the ease with
which content can be
shared;
❑searchability: the ability to
find content.
(boyd , 2014, p. 11)

Key elements
◘ User-generated content
◘ User-generated interaction [different kinds of interaction]

◘ Message Directionality/ Two-way communication(

)

◘ Audience [selective]
◘ Specific infrastructure and tools used in the production

and delivery of messages
◘ Web 2.0

◘ Social Networks/ Social Network Sites

+/ -

Advantages:
Quick interaction and global connectivity
Personal branding and content sharing
Access to information

Disadvantages:
✘ Privacy issues and online harassment
✘ Manipulation and misinformation
✘ Time-consuming distractions

References (inter ali.)
•

•
•
•

•
•
•
•

•
•
•
•
•
•

•
•

•

Aichner, T., Grünfelder, M., Maurer, O., & Jegeni, D. (2021). Twenty-Five Years of Social Media: A Review of Social Media
Applications and Definitions from 1994 to 2019. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 24(4), 215-222.
boyd, D. M., & Ellison, N. B. (2007). Social network sites: Definition, history, and scholarship. Journal of
computer‐mediated Communication, 13(1), 210-230.
boyd, danah (2009). "Social Media is Here to Stay... Now What?" Microsoft Research Tech Fest, Redmond, Washington,
February 26: https://www.danah.org/papers/talks/MSRTechFest2009.html;
boyd, danah (2014). It's complicated: The social lives of networked teens. Yale University Press,
https://www.danah.org/books/ItsComplicated.pdf
Carr, Caleb T. și Hayes, Rebecca A. (2015). „Social Media: Defining, Developing, and Divining”, în Atlantic Journal of
Communication, vol.23, nr. 1, pp. 46-65;
Ellison NB, boyd DM. (2013) Sociality through social network sites. In Dutton WH, ed.The Oxford handbook of internet studies.
Oxford University Press, pp. 151–172.
Howard,Philip N. șI Parks,Malcom R.(2012). ”Social media and political change: Capacity, constraint, and consequence”, în
Journal of Communication, nr. 62, pp.359–362;
Joinson, A. N. (2008, April). Looking at, looking up or keeping up with people? Motives and use of Facebook. In Proceedings of
the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 1027-1036).
Kaplan, Andreas M., și Haenlein, Michael, (2010). „Users of the world, unite! The challenges and opportunities of social
media”, în Business Horizons, nr. 53, pp. 59–68;
Lewis, Bobbi Kay, (2010). „Social media and strategic communication: Attitudes and perceptions among college students”, în
Public Relations Journal, vol.4 nr. 3, pp.1–23;
Lovink, Geert, (2011). Networks without a cause: A critique of social media. Polity Press;
Lovink, G. W. (2012). What is the social in social media? e-flux journal, 2012(#40).
Miller, David, et. al. (2016). How the world changed social media. UCL press.
Russo, Angelina, Watkins, Jerry, Kelly, Linda și Chan, Sebastian, (2008). „Participatory communication with social media”, în
Curator The Museum Journal, nr. 51, pp.21–31;
Ronzhyn, A., Cardenal, A. S., & Batlle Rubio, A. (2022). Defining affordances in social media research: A literature review. Social
Media + Society. doi: 10.1177/14614448221135187
Terranova, Tiziana și Donovan, Joan, (2013). „Occupy social networks: The paradoxes of corporate social media for networked
social movements”, în Lovink, Geert și Rasch, Miriam, “Unlike us” reader: Social media monopolies and their alternatives.
Institute of Network Cultures, 296–311;
van Dijck, Jose, (2013). The culture of connectivity: A critical history of social media. Oxford University Press

Mandatory readings :
Ellison NB, boyd DM. (2013) Sociality
through social network sites. In
Dutton WH, ed.The oxford handbook
of internet studies. Oxford University
Press, pp. 151–172.

van Dijck, Jose, (2013). The culture of
connectivity: A critical history of
social media, pp. 3-9

