C3. Social Media: types, history, evolution and consumer
trends

Nume Prenume

Assoc.Prof. Arabela BRICIU

Types of social media
[SM] platforms
• There are plenty of online articles
discussing various types of social media

• There are different types of social media
services that cater to different needs and
adapt to different types of content.
• While some have overlapping features,
others are more specific in terms of use
and type of services offered.
• SM content ranges across text posts,
images,
videos,
comments
and
networking platforms.
• Their classification should be based on
use and content, but many classifications
are geared towards their marketing and
advertising potential.

This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA-NC

Types of social media
[SM] platforms
We can distinguish the following categories based on
content:
• Social networks
• News platforms and discussion forums
• Image sharing networks
• Video streaming and sharing platforms
• Social audio platforms
• Bookmarking networks
• Blogging and publishing networks
• Micro-blogging networks
• Consumer review networks
• Interest-based networks
• Social shopping networks
• Sharing economy networks (exchange of goods and
services)
This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA-NC

Social networks
Social networking sites allow users to connect and share
information with other users like themselves.
Social networks help build virtual communities for
people with similar attitudes, interests, education,
opinions and lifestyles
→principles of association

e.g. Facebook
Instagram, TikTok, X, Linkedin

https://www.youtube.com/@facebookapp/videos

https://www.youtube.com/@facebookapp/videos

https://www.youtube.com/@LinkedIn

https://www.youtube.com/@LinkedIn

Image sharing
networks
These platforms allow users to distribute images &short videos

Most of them provide interactive features. Users can create
profiles and comment the posted media..
it is no longer about "social" activities in the purest sense, but
about practical activities, especially those based on content
consumption - GlobalWebIndex report (2019)

→principles of organisation

E.g. Instagram, Flickr, Photobucket

News platforms and discussion forums
These platforms allow users to post links to news and
other information that is contained in the
news/topics.
The main feature is the voting of posts/topics, and
those that get more votes are being highlighted and
given a higher rank.
Simplifies the search and allows users to distribute
bookmarks to their " followers ".
→principles of organisation and participation

E.g. Reddit, Quora, Digg, Clubhouse

https://www.youtube.com/@reddit/videos

https://www.youtube.com/@reddit/videos

https://www.youtube.com/@reddit/videos

Video streaming and
sharing platforms
These platforms allow users to distribute and stream videos of
various durations.

most of them have interactive features. Users can create
profiles and comment on uploaded content.
it is no longer about "social" activities in the purest sense, but
about practical activities, especially those based on content
consumption - GlobalWebIndex report (2019)

→principles of organization &content management

E.g. YouTube, TikTok, Snapchat, Vimeo, Twitch

Social audio platforms
• These social media platforms use audio recording as their primary
means of communication. It can include text messaging, podcasts,
audio recording and editing tools, and virtual audio rooms.
• They are recent and evolving
• 2020: launch of Clubhouse
• developers are still trying to figure out what works for their users and
what doesn’t
→principles of organization &content management
• E.g., Clubhouse, Telegram Voice Chats, Facebook Live Audio Rooms
and Podcasts, Discord Stages, Spotify Greenroom, Twitter Spaces

• https://www.youtube.com/@Spotify/videos

Bookmarking
sites/networks
These platforms allow users to save and organise their ideas,
articles, posts, and other content for later use. Many people
also share links to lists of online resources.
The main feature is labelling. The purpose of these sites is to
discover new content based on shared interests and discuss
trends
Simplifies the search and allows users to distribute bookmarks
to their followers.

→principles of organization

E.g. Pintrest, Mix (former StumbleUpon), Flipboard, Feedly,
Pocket

Blogging and publishing
networks
These platforms provide a place
for users to post their thoughts
about work, current events,
hobbies and more. They enjoy
many of the benefits of their
own blog without having to host
it on their own website

The main feature is content
creation. The purpose of these
sites is to allow content to be
published based on common
interests.

→principles of organization

E.g. Medium, WordPress,
Facebook, Tumblr

Microblogging
These platforms allow users to upload short descriptions (text)
that may include links to various websites or other social media
platforms

These posts are available on the "wall" of all
subscribers/followers
Simplifies search and allows users to distribute bookmarks to
their followers as well principles of participation

→principles of participation

E.g. X, Threads

Consumer review
networks
They provide a space for users
where they can review products
or services they have used.
→principles of ranking

E.g. Yelp, Zomato, TripAdvisor,
OpenTable

Interest-based networks
Are social networks that support people
to share and distribute their hobbies and
interests with other people (Social
networks according to common interests)

→principles of association

E.g., Goodreads, Strava, Peanut

Social shopping
networks
• Such networks help users identify trends, share
great finds, make purchases and follow their
favourite brands. They focus on e-commerce,
and the social element makes these networks
engaging and fun.
• Many social networks now include social
shopping elements.
→ marketplace principles
• E.g., Instagram, Poshmark, Etsy, Facebook

Sharing economy networks (exchange of
goods and services)
• allows people to share resources such as equipment, services and
skills with each other, often at a significantly lower cost than
traditional retail or contract work.
• Anybody can participate and is allowed to get by without owning
valuables such as cars, houses, tools and money, while creating
opportunities for others to extract value from unused possessions or
talents.
→principles of reciprocity
• E.g., Lending Club, Couchsurfing, Eatwith

Other Classiffications
• See: https://blog.hootsuite.com/types-of-social-media/

Categorii Social Media. Prisma conversației 5.0 realizată de Brian Solis, disponibilă la adresa:
www.conversationprism.com, accesată în 10.09.2021

History and evolution of
social media platforms

Brief history
• 1997: 6 degrees
• 1998 Tencent, QQ
• 2002: Friendster
• 2003 myspace
• 2003 hi5
• 2003 Linkedin
• 2003 Photobucket
• 2003 Delicious
• 2004 Flickr
• 2004 Facebook
• 2005 Youtube
• 2005 Bebo
• 2005 reddit
• 2006 Twitter
• 2007 Tumblr
• 2009 WhatsApp
• 2009 foursquare
• 2009 vevo

• 2010 Instagram
• 2010 Pintrest
• 2010 wechat
• 2011 Google +
• 2011 Snapchat
• 2011 Twitch
• 2012 Vine
• 2012 Tinder
• 2013 Telegram
• 2014 musical.ly
• 2015 Discord
• 2017 TikTok
• 2023 Threads

: https://youtu.be/gAEExRJF_Vw?si=Y-jkGdXLSwztMZJo ,

Sursa: https://www.broadbandsearch.net/blog/complete-history-social-media, accesat în 20.09. 2023

For a more detailed description of the history and forerunners of social media, see:
https://youtu.be/Cz_kopcg9rc (accessed 4.03. 2026)

Source: https://open.library.okstate.edu/introtosocialmedia/chapter/social-media-marketing-a-brief-history/
(accessed 4.03. 2026)

