C7. Key concepts and theories for studying Social 
Media

Nume Prenume

Assoc. Prof. Arabela BRICIU



Why do social networks
exist and how do they
influence us?

Five rules regarding connection and contagion—the
structure and function—of social networks

Christakis and Fowler (2009, pp. 16-26):

1. WE SHAPE OUR NETWORK 

2. OUR NETWORK SHAPES US 

3. OUR FRIENDS AFFECT US 

4. OUR FRIENDS’ FRIENDS’ FRIENDS AFFECT US 

5. THE NETWORK HAS A LIFE OF ITS OWN 



• Source: Christakis & Fowler 
(2009, p. 296)



Network Science

• Albert-László Barabási (https://barabasi.com/book/)

• Martin Grandjean (http://www.martingrandjean.ch)



Cărți traduse în 
peste 20 de 

limbi



Social networks theories

GRANOVETTER, Mark (1973) : The strenght of weak ties

• Any positive and symmetrical social tie can be evaluated according to
its strength, which depends on:
• Time invested
• Mutual trust (privacy)
• Emotional intensity
• Degree of reciprocity

• Strong ties : A and B spend a lot of time together, trust each other, get
emotionally involved and do each other favours.

• Weak ties : A and B rarely interact, little trust in each other, low
emotional involvement

• Absent ties : Non-existent and insignificant - A has interacted with B 
little in some context



Absent tie

Strong, weak, absent ties



https://youtu.be/g3bBajcR5fE

This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA-NC

Granovetter's study - The Influence of Social Ties on Occupational Mobility
(see Granovetter, 1983- supplementary bibliography)



The Strength of Weak Ties

• Homophily (similarity): individuals prefer to interact with similar alters
• Cognitive balance: alters with whom an ego has strong ties will, in turn, 

develop positive ties with each other...if not strong, at least weak. 
• Bridge ties: between pairs of nodes that would otherwise be far apart

(Granovetter demonstrates that these are most likely weak ties).
• Actor A's bridges allow ties to nodes to which A's friends have no ties -

they allow access to new information
→Weak ties are much more likely to provide new information and are 

surprisingly strong
→Weak ties give individuals access to information and resources other

than those available in their social circle or neighbourhood.

• Another of Granovetter's concepts, developed based on social 
relationships and networks and their importance in the economy, is
embeddedness: https://youtu.be/KXGbCjzmm2M
→ the degree of involvement of an 'entity' in a social network



Example created by Filip Agneessens, Associate Professor at Surrey Business 
School, University of Surrey (2019, Research in Social Sciences Summer School)



Source: Christakis & 
Fowler (2009, p. 297)



The Small World Problem

Milgram, Stanley (1967): the probability of any 2 people to know each other
• Two approaches on society and the world:
1. Any two people in the world, no matter where they are located, can be
connected by acquaintances or ties, and the number of these acquaintances is
quite small
2.The world is a collection of groups or social circles that any bridging ties
cannot connect - his example was related to a message that can circulate in
one circle of acquaintances but can never pass into another circle of
acquaintances.
• Milgram Experiment : https://youtu.be/NRWSF1c0Ez0
• Six ties between any two people: https://youtu.be/TcxZSmzPw8k
• Kevin Bacon's game, the distance of any American actor from his fellow

Kevin Bacon: https://youtu.be/n9u-TITxwoM






• The idea of the six degrees of separation is that: two individuals,
anywhere in the world, can be connected by a chain of six or fewer
acquaintances.

→This means that while Ion doesn't know Maria, she knows Iosif, who
knows Iana, who knows Maria. Thus, Ion is three intermediaries away
or three degrees of separation.
→the distance between any two nodes in a network is unexpectedly
small→ "we live in a small world".



Pioneers



Lanțul slăbiciunilor- I.L. Caragiale (1952)
The Chain of weaknesses- Romanian literature

https://youtu.be/Vd9_5pVT09E?si=TDCaESyXz91XQsrV



Separation degrees of the …
mathematicians
Hollywood actors
clusters

Erdős number - the distance between any two mathematicians by Paul Erdős https://youtu.be/izdZPx89ph4
https://youtu.be/izdZPx89ph4 

The Kevin Bacon game - the distance any Hollywood actor is from Bacon  https://youtu.be/vOUdy2J0lfU
https://youtu.be/vOUdy2J0lfU 

Barabasi and Jeong: the nineteen degrees of separation of the ( www) https://youtu.be/qmCrtuS9vtU
https://youtu.be/qmCrtuS9vtU

       httptps:s//:y/o/yutouu.bteu/.Rbfgej/HRoVfgCjZHwoUV?sCi=ZDwyXUa?asJqi=FaDqy9XWa2aHJ8qcFaq9W2H8c 

Watts și Stogartz (1998): crowding goes beyond social 
networking - remote connections https://youtu.be/QUWds9gt6aE

https://youtu.be/QUWds9gt6aE 



3.5 degrees of separation on Facebook

• https://research.facebo
ok.com/blog/2016/2/thre
e-and-a-half-degrees-of-
separation/ 



Groups, cliques, clusters Structural hole 
theory(Burt,1992, 2000, 
2010)

• In general, not all possible connections exist 
between members of a network, a phenomenon 
known as structural holes. Better connected 
individuals are more informed and influential, but 
they are also more subject to influence from 
others. 

• There are homogeneous networks in terms of 
the degree of connectedness of nodes and others 
where there is a small elite of centrally located 
and well-connected individuals alongside a large 
mass of relatively isolated actors. Differences in 
the degree of connectedness are relevant to the 
order and hierarchy within the group. 

Structural holes

This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA-NC






01
03

02

Within a network, there 
Within one group, 

are groups and sub-
individuals who can 

groups that communicate 
Structural holes indicate how provide bridges 

more intensively with 
actors are grouped in between distinct 

each other than with the neighbourhoods—when there groups within the 
network are more 

rest of the network is a structural hole between A important for 
- Dyads and B, exchanges between the network 
- triads two cannot be carried out communication than 
- small groups because they are either individuals with 

unaware of each other or have multiple ties.
high transaction costs.

Thus, another actor C who has a 
tie to both actor A and actor B 
has the advantage of influencing 
exchanges or choosing between 
the two



Tertius gaudens (Simmel, 1950) 
is the person who gains an advantage 
from the division of two other actors 
and is defined as "the third one who 
wins". 

• An individual dealing with a structural 
hole is in control by having the power to 
negotiate the relationship between two 
actors divided by that hole. 

• The power of structural holes is given by 
the opportunity to control and negotiate 
the relationship between the two actors 
who have valuable information, which 
highlights the theory's relevance for 
Internet networks.

• Burt (2000, p. 355) observed that 
accurate, ambiguous, or distorted 
information strategically transmitted 
between contacts by the "tertius" can 
turn into informational strategies in which 
information is altered or suppressed to 
distance „alters” or create conflict.

This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA



• Tertius iungens intermediation may involve the 
desire to create or build a network by combining 
resources or by including and connecting certain 
nodes, but it may also involve simultaneously 
excluding other nodes or enhancing the 
reputation of the intermediary node by creating 
valuable introductions (with other nodes).

The broker can exploit his 
alters by introducing them 
to valuable nodes or by 
determining gaudens-like 

This Photos by Unknown Author is licensed under CC BY-SA
orientations to keep 
competitors or combatants 
at bay. 

• Tertius Iungens's activities can generate selfish inclinations, 
oriented towards individual well-being, which can harm the 
network.

• See: https://youtu.be/llOED28rf54 



• Burt, 1992: there are two types of benefits from structural 
holes in networks: information and control

• INFORMATION (structural gaps lead to informational 
benefits for actors inside and outside the network because 
they bring a new input of information - unknown to one of 

The theory the parties → The connected individuals are more informed 
but also more subject to the influences of those around 
them)

of structural • actors with access to diverse information can make better use of 
it

holes(Burt,1 • actors with solid connections are the first to know important 
information. 

• actors who manage structural holes in a network enjoy higher 

992) rates of return on their investments, know the context better, 
and get more profitable opportunities. 

• CONTROL (the advantages of being a key player in a well-
connected network)

• : Well-connected central actors to various mutually 
unconnected groups have more bargaining opportunities 
than peripheral ones, so they can control most of the 
information flows within the network. 



The theory of structural holes(Burt,1992, 2000, 2011)

•Burt (1992, 2000, 2010): the benefits an individual 
derives from their network (ego-network) of contacts 
vary according to :

• Size (number of ties): the more alters an ego has, the greater the 
chance that one of the alters has the resources the ego needs.

• Density: an ego is much more advantaged if the density of links 
between alters is lower (the chances of obtaining non-redundant 
information increase) -(Burt, 2000)

• Heterogeneity: various alters (gender, age, race, occupation, 
functions, skills, etc.)

• Compositional quality: the number of alters who hold high levels of 
resources that the ego needs. The more connected an ego is to the 
alters they need, the more social capital they are expected to have.

See: https://youtu.be/GaQLRCaLQG4 



https://youtu.be/VngfnLGRy5Y

Burt, 2015:



• Individuals in the network end up developing 
common values, beliefs, attitudes, behaviours, 
and practices: CONTAGION– Burt (1987)

Theories 
concerning the • Influence increases more in networks with 

higher cohesiveness than in those with 
consequences lower cohesiveness

of social • Actors occupying similar positions in the 
network usually share common 

networks characteristics - same social status, same 
behavioural traits

Physical proximity →Social proximity 
(friendship) →Common attitudes
• The more frequent and empathetic the 

interaction between A and B, the more 
likely B is to adopt an attitude, belief, etc. 
that A has adopted. 



• Social networks influence Nicholas Christakis (TED Talks)- (optional 
/supplementary)
• https://www.ted.com/talks/nicholas_christakis_the_hidden_influence_of_social_

networks/footnotes#t-54396
• https://www.ted.com/talks/nicholas_christakis_how_social_networks_predict_ep

idemics#t-109721   

• Studies:
• Fowler, James H. și Christakis, Nicholas A., 2008.  “Dynamic spread of 

happiness in a large social network: longitudinal analysis over 20 years in the 
Framingham Heart Study” - see  http://nrs.harvard.edu/urn-
3:HUL.InstRepos:3685822  (optional /supplementary)

•  Nicholas A. Christakis și Fowler, James H. 2007, The Spread of Obesity in a 
Large Social Network over 32 Years  (optional /supplementary)- see 
https://www.nejm.org/doi/full/10.1056/NEJMsa066082 



Source: Christakis & 
Fowler (2009, p. 299)



Information sharing on social 
networks

Burt (1999) argues that there are two 
OPINION LEADERS on the network - 

(2) mechanisms of sharing information 
network centrality

within a network:

• through a two-step communication • - Individuals with a high degree of 
flow: opinion leaders disseminate centrality in the network are likely to 
information to the group be opinion leaders of the network

• contagion →through structural • - Individuals with a high degree of 
equivalence that generates adoption "connectivity" (betweenness) serve 
of behaviour within the group as bridges; nodes that link clusters - 

GATEKEEPERS
• - Structural hole spanners are more 

likely to connect the most important 
nodes (opinion leaders)



• Opinion leaders control the flow of 
information within the community; 
whereas

• SOURCE: Lou și Tang (2013) –
http://keg.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn/jietang/publicati • Structural Hole Connections dominate 
ons/WWW13-Lou&Tang-Structural-Hole- the distribution of information 
Information-Diffusion.pdf , acces s ed October between communities
2023;



MASS COMMUNICATION THEORIES
Media theories



„Media is the message” (McLuhan, 1964)



Media – Mass communication

• Media – plural medium → communication channel
• from print to digital data, including various forms of information. 
• Anything that can reach or influence people, including telephones, television 

and the internet, can be considered a form of media.

• Mass communication: the process by which a complex entity 
produces and broadcasts, through one or multiple devices, public 
messages to a huge, heterogeneous and dispersed audience.

• It involves encoding and decoding in several stages
• Noise: semantic, background and machine noise



The defining features of classic mass 
communication(Dominick, 2009, p. 16)

• Complex and formalised organisations produce mass communication
• Mass communication organisations have several gatekeepers
• Mass communication organisations need large amounts of money to 

operate
• Mass communication organisations exist to make a profit
• Mass communication organisations are highly competitive

Do these still apply to the current media context governed by Social Media platforms?



Early theories in media studies

• Hypodermic needle or magic 
bullet theory or the described 
tape theory (propaganda)

• Two- or n-step communication 
model

• Gatekeeping theory



Magic bullet theory

https://youtu.be/Qt5MjBlvGcY

• Assumption: The media has a direct, immediate, and consequent effect on its 
audience.

• A media message is ''injected'' entirely into the audience's consciousness (which is 
passive) and is wholly accepted.

• The media message is a bullet fired from the 'media gun' into the 'head' of the 
audience.

• Harold Lasswell proposed the magic bullet theory after the First World War. As 
radio, films, and commercials gained massive popularity between the 1930s and 
1950s, the effects of the media on people's behaviour seemed obvious.

• Factors:
• The emergence and popularisation of radio and television.
• The emergence of persuasive industries such as advertising and propaganda.
• The Payne Fund studies of the 1930s looked at the impact of cinema films on children
• Hitler's monopolisation of the media during World War II to unite the German public behind 

the Nazi party. 
• To the casual observer, people seemed truly powerless to resist the messages 

coming from the media. For the first time, messages were crafted for a target 
audience to elicit specific responses.



Specific assumptions of the hypodermic 
needle/magic bullet theory

• Humans react in a uniform way to stimuli.
• The media message is 'injected' directly into the 'blood' of a 

population, like fluid from a syringe.
• Messages are strategically created to elicit desired responses.
• The effects of media messages are immediate and powerful, capable 

of causing significant behavioural changes in people.
• The public cannot escape the influence of the media.



Gatekeeping theory
Assumptions: gatekeepers are, at a high level, the data 
makers who control the flow of information to an entire 
social system. Based on personal preferences, 
professional experience, social influences or biases, they 
allow certain information to flow to their audience.

• Lewin (1947, 1951), the creator of the concept, analysed gatekeepers 
from a psychological perspective, investigating how and why families' 
eating habits and activities differ. In the groups he examined, he observed 
that housewives controlled decision-making about eating habits and 
activities by creating behavioural barriers and incentives; Lewin referred 
to these housewives as gatekeepers.

• Gatekeeping is selecting and filtering the media content that can be 
consumed in the time and space available to an individual. This means 
that gatekeeping falls into a surveillance and monitoring role. These 
gatekeeping decisions are made daily to select the relevant items the 
audience will see. 

• The gatekeeper decides what information should pass through it (through 
the information "gate") to the group or individuals beyond and what 
information should not. 

https://youtu.be/vwiD5OC0hN0?si=3zMCRk2HFdLE6py3

This Photo by Unknown Author is licensed under CC 
BY-NC-ND



Limited effects theory
• The theory of limited effects was proposed by 

                    sociologist Paul Lazarsfeld. 

• Assumption: even if the media affects individuals' thoughts and 
opinions, this effect is minimal or limited at best.

• The theory was developed in response to the magic 
bullet/hypodermic needle theory, which emphasised the powerful 
influence of the media.

• Lazarsfeld believes elites and the highly educated are the primary 
gatekeepers and consumers of media, whose biases affect how and 
what information is redistributed among those who consume media 
at much lower levels. 

• Opinion leaders have mitigated or mitigated media effects by 
discussing and interpreting media messages with their peers.

• By the time they reach adulthood, people have their own 
perceptions and opinions that are independent of the media. 
Therefore, their peers and social institutions in general influence 
people more. The influence of opinion leaders, in particular, far 
exceeds that of the media.



The two-step flow of communication model
• suggests that the flow of information and influence from the 

media to the public involves two stages: from the media to 
specific individuals (e.g. opinion leaders) and from them to the 
public.

• General assumption: Interpersonal communication has a stronger 
impact on individual attitudes than the media itself →Certain 
individuals are more central and influential in their groups, often 
acting as intermediaries between the media and the public. 
Compared to the rest of the population, these individuals were 
found to be more exposed to the media. 

• Thus, if personal influence was so important, and if it was mainly 
executed by certain individuals who were more exposed to the 
media than the people they influenced, then it could be assumed 
that there was a two-stage flow process from the media to 
opinion leaders and from them to their followers.

• The concept of a "two-step flow of communication" arose from 
The People's Choice, a 1948 American polling study by Paul 
Lazarsfeld and his colleagues at Columbia University's Office of 
Applied Social Research.

https://youtu.be/csGHExeP3uA



N steps flow of communication

• The first change to the two-step flow of communication was the introduction of 
the more-than-two-step flow. 

• This allowed the inclusion of other optional flow directions such as :
•  horizontal (between leaders, between followers) and vertical (from leaders 

to followers, from active to inactive); 
• direct (linking two actors directly) and indirect (linking actors through a third 

party or a chain of intermediaries); 
• top-down (from leaders to followers, from the media to the public) and 

bottom-up (from opinion leaders to the media, from followers to influencers, 
from the marginal to the central).

See: Ognyanova, K. (2017). 
„Multistep flow of communication: 
Network effects”
https://kateto.net/wp-
content/uploads/2018/05/Multiste
p%20Flow%20of%20Communicatio
n,%20Network%20Effects%20%5BP
reprint%5D%20-
%20Ognyanova%20-%202017.pdf

Source: Ognyanova, 2017, p.3



https://youtu.be/07xlZDLQi9A

Cultivation theory

Assumptions: The media generally presents a picture of the world that does
not reflect reality. Television images are an exaggeration or fantasy of what
exists in reality. 

People who watch TV frequently are more likely to be influenced by the
messages in the audiovisual universe.

• The influence goes so far that people's worldviews and perceptions begin to 
reflect what they repeatedly see and hear on TV → which contributes to 
how people perceive social reality.

• Television provides many ideas and conceptions about various social and 
cultural issues such as race, gender, sexuality, etc. 

• Over time, a fixed image of different groups of people is formed, and viewers 
begin to absorb these ideas, which they then use as a map to navigate life. 

• This constant exposure to media content cultivates specific values, beliefs, 
attitudes and desires in people. 

• People unconsciously shape their thought processes and behaviour based on 
what they consume. 



Media ecology https://youtu.be/Ko6J9v1C9zE

• McLuhan(1964): „Media is the message” —the communication media with and 
through which we interact with the world are, in essence, extensions of our sensory 
apparatus → Each communication medium has a set of intrinsic sensory 
characteristics designed to enhance our ability to "feel" the world →The study of 
communication media is, therefore, the study of our sensory extensions.

• Media ecology concerns the effects that media generate, who is affected, how, to 
what extent, and why.

• Basic assumptions: The media are infiltrated into every fact and action in society. 
The media fix es our perceptions and organise our experiences. The media connects 
the world.
→ Mass media are everywhere and all the time; media determine what we know and 
how we feel about what we know, and media connect us with others.
To understand the effects of the symbolic medium, McLuhan divides human history 
into four periods: the Tribal Age, the Literacy Age, the Print Age, and the Electronic 
Age. 
• Social media ecology→ platformization 

For example, with the rise of Instagram Stories/Reels, creators are faced with a new set of 
content creation possibilities that can be compared to their previous experiences with 
different platforms and how this impacts their brand subjectivities.

• The platform's infrastructure and technical characteristics affect the production, 
distribution, and circulation of content. 

• Activities are increasingly becoming "platform dependent" (Nieborg & Poell, 2018) 
→Content circulation and visibility are subject not only to the terms and conditions 
of a narrow group of platforms but also to algorithmic infrastructures. Thus, content 
creation is 'conditioned' by platforms' distribution, analysis, and recirculation 
conditions (Morris, 2015). See: https://youtu.be/wUPKBrgxbOI



Uses and gratification
https://youtu.be/aopqPs7rb_Q

General assumptions: 

 *Audiences take an active role in selecting a medium and interpreting and 
integrating it into their lives - Audiences have a sense of self-awareness about their 
motives and needs, which allows them to share their media experiences as active 
media users.

 *Different types of media compete with each other and with other sources 
of satisfaction for audience attention.
 *The media that provides the most satisfaction for a person will be used 
more often than other types.

"Uses and gratifications" focuses on: 
"(1) the social and psychological origins of needs (2), which generate expectations (3) 
from media or other sources (4), leading to differentiated patterns of media exposure (5), 
leading to need gratification (6) and other consequences (7), perhaps mostly 
unintended" (Katz et al., 1974, p. 20).

Rubin (2002) includes seven elements in uses and gratifications: psychological and 
social environment, communication needs and motives, media, attitudes and 
expectations about media, functional alternatives to media use, communication 
behaviour, and outcomes or consequences of behaviour.



Uses and gratification
• Blumler and Katz (1964) identified several types of needs that motivate 

people to seek satisfaction in media:
• Cognitive - Refers to the acquisition of information to aid the thinking and 

understanding process. People use media to develop their skills or knowledge in a 
particular area.

• Affective - Refers to emotions or feelings. People use media to arouse certain 
emotions in themselves, such as happiness, fear or pleasure.

• Personal Integrative - Refers to promoting one's image, reputation or status. 
People with this need use media, such as Facebook and YouTube, to enhance their 
credibility or social standing or to affirm their sense of self.

• Social Integrative - Refers to interaction with family and friends. People use media 
to connect with others.

• De-stressing - Refers to having fun and reducing stress. People use media as a 
means of deflection or escape from reality.

• 10 uses and satisfactions for using social media (Whiting and Williams, 
2013): 

social interaction (88%), seeking information (80%), spending time (76%), 
entertainment (64%), relaxation (60%), usefulness of communication (56%), 
expressing opinions (56%), usefulness of comfort (52%), sharing information (40%) 
and watching and following others (20%).



Agenda setting

Mc. Combs and Shaw (1972) -
Early beginnings: Trenaman and The Agenda-Setting Function of 
McQuail's study of the 1959 UK Mass Media and Cobb and Elder

general election, which was (1971) - The politics of agenda-
published in Television and the building: An alternative 

Political Image (1961) perspective for modern 
democratic theory

The media has the power to 
choose, order and prioritise the 

➔ The media agenda becomes information it is to present to the 
the public agenda. public, thus setting not only the 

media's agenda but also the 
public's agenda.

https://youtu.be/C7qf9gQpoF4



Priming
https://youtu.be/iMEyTtilIXo

• Priming is the process by which the media, by emphasising certain 
themes (issues), changes the standards (criteria) by which people 
evaluate the political agenda and the daily agenda.

• The media gives a certain event a special importance so that it gives 
people the impression that this news is the most important. 

• This is done on a daily basis. The selected news is broadcast as a 
headline or covered regularly for months. 

• Terms such as headlines, special news, discussion, and expert opinion 
are used. 

• The media primes the news by repeating it and giving it more 
prominence, e.g. the war in Ukraine.



Framing
https://youtu.be/f5Ncm-Di5YM?si=b07xq0_zqppcJd9X

• Framing refers to how people attach importance to specific news 
stories and how they contextualise them → as a process of selective 
control

• The media sets the frame of reference (frame) for political, 
economic, and social means, according to which the meaning of 
events, actions, and public statements is constituted. 

• Assumptions: 
• News content is usually shaped and contextualised within the same 

frame of reference.
• Audiences adopt frames of reference and see the world in a similar 

way → to people who attach importance to a news story and 
perceive the context in which an issue is viewed.



Third-person effects
https://youtu.be/UAsIWdGWEuc

• Davison (1983) defines the third-person effect hypothesis as the 
likelihood that members of an audience exposed to persuasive 
communication expect communication to have a more significant 
effect on others than on themselves.

• The third-person effect is the belief that the media will not have an 
influence on oneself but rather on others --> this belief of the 
media's impact on others may motivate us to act or respond in such a 
way, not because we are influenced, but because we believe others 
might be. 

• This difference in perception may not only explain people's support 
for limiting free speech on various issues but may also have 
implications for public policy and other social factors.

• We may be more resistant to being influenced by advertising, 
especially if we perceive it as pure manipulation or propaganda. Still, 
we may not make such an assessment about the content of the news.



Source: https://youtu.be/kVAztNx0rHQ

Strong effects model (conclusion)



The impact of mass communication theories in 
the study of social media Luoma-Aho (2010).

• Reconsidering the two-step flow of communication
• The flow of information has grown exponentially.
• Opinion leaders are no longer mainly politicians or people of authority, 

but many bloggers and microbloggers, who are basically media 
producers, are also opinion leaders who broadcast their own 
interpretations.

• Opinions take new turns when people post their opinions on their social 
networks, and unintended consequences can arise when translation 
services translate messages and posts between cultures and languages.

• Opinion leaders continue to play an important role in shaping opinions, 
although not so much in mediating information as in targeting opinions 
to specific audiences.

• Today's opinion leaders could be called 'attention' leaders, as their main 
strengths are no longer opinions but directing attention. 



The impact of mass communication theories in the
study of social media Luoma-Aho (2010).

• Agenda-setting theory changes in several ways
• While some individuals aim to become citizen journalists and writers, others 

accidentally become citizen journalists by being on the scene while something 
important is happening around them.

• When many people have mobile communication devices with cameras and 
internet access wherever they are, they can shape and shape the agenda faster 
than traditional media.

• In many parts of the Western world, traditional media institutions are 
disappearing, so there is a vacuum for agenda-setting. 

• With the introduction of new media, the leading role of large media institutions 
is diminishing, and selective exposure is becoming the norm 

• People gather their personal and specific news and information from many 
sources, both professional and non-professional.



Framing in Social Media

Ahmed, S., Cho, J., & Jaidka, K. (2019). Framing social 
conflicts in news coverage and social media: A 
multicountry comparative study. International 
Communication Gazette, 81(4), 1–
26. https://escholarship.org/content/qt5w67x1jg/qt5w6
7x1jg.pdf

Valenzuela, S., Piña, M., & Ramírez, J. (2017). Behavioral 
effects of framing on social media users: How conflict, 
economic, human interest, and morality frames drive 
news sharing. Journal of Communication, 67(5), 803–
826. https://d1wqtxts1xzle7.cloudfront.net/54265366/
When_News_Frames_Go_Viral_-__JoC_all_vf-libre.pdf

• De Vreese, C. H., & Boomgaarden, H. G. (2003). 
Valenced news frames and public support for the 
EU. Communications, 28(4), 361–381.



Priming in Social Media

• Luoma-aho, V., Pirttimäki, T., Maity, D., Munnukka, J., & Reinikainen, H. 
(2022). Primed for authenticity: How priming impacts authenticity 
perception of social media influencers. In The Psychology of 
Influencers (pp. 89–105). 
Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003181286-7

Pesonen, J., & Horster, E. (2020). User-generated content in tourism: A 
review and implications for future research. Journal of Sustainable 
Tourism, 28(3), 393–
407. https://doi.org/10.1080/09669582.2020.1760287

• van Weelden, E., & van der Meer, T. G. L. A. (2015). The effects of 
negative framing and photograph congruency on message credibility in 
news articles about alcohol abuse. Public Relations Review, 41(5), 644–
650. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pubrev.2015.07.005



Selective exposure

Users can easily customize their information flow, so they get more consistent information 
that supports their existing beliefs and filter out as much inconsistent information as they 

want. 

Social media not only helps disseminate more information at a faster rate, but also allows 
users to access information more selectively. Although faced with an infinite variety of 

information, social media users can limit their exposure to certain information they find 
objectionable. Thus, social media use could exacerbate media and citizen fragmentation, 

narrowing rather than broadening people's political horizons.

Iyengar and Hahn (2009) argue that information overload in the new media environment can 
further reinforce selective exposure. They point out that when candidates, interest groups 

and voters all converge on the internet, the possibility of selective exposure to political 
information increases.



• Messing & Westwood (2014) argue that social network-based 
information, such as online news, fundamentally alters the 
context in which news reading occurs. 
→ Social media provides a venue that promotes exposure to 
news from politically diverse people 
→ this exposure serves to emphasise social value rather than 
party affiliation. 
→ the two researchers found that the social endorsement 
generated among social media users increases the likelihood 
that people will select information 
→ the mere presence of social endorsement serves to reduce 
political selectivity to levels that may, however, be random



1. Barabasi, A.-L(2017) Linked-Noua știință a rețelelor,București,Brumar;

2. Burt, R. S. (1987), „Social contagion and innovation, cohesion versus structural equivalence”, în American 
Journal of Sociology, vol. 92, pp. 1287-1335;

3. Burt, R. S. (1999), „The social capital of opinion leaders”, în Annals, nr. 566, pp. 37-54.

4. Burt, R. S. (2000). „The Network Structure of Social Capital”, în Research in Organizational Behaviour, Vol. 22, 
pp. 345-423;

5. Castells, Manuel (1996). The rise of the network society: The information age: Economy, society and culture (Vol. 
1). Blackwell;

6. van Dijck, Jose, (2013), The culture of connectivity: A crifcal history of social media, Oxford University Press ;

7. Dominick, Joseph R. (2009), Ipostazele comunicării de masă: media în era digitală, comunicare.ro;

8. Drăgan, Ioan, (2008), Comunicarea- vol II., Editura Rao;

9. Severin, Werner J. și Tankard, James W. Jr, (2004), Perspective asupra teoriilor comunicării de masă, Polirom; 

10. Iyengar, Shanto; Peters, Mark D. și Kinder, Donald R., (1982), „Experimental Demonstrations of the ”Not-So-
Minimal” Consequences of Television News Programs”, în The American Political Science Reivew, vol. 76 (4), pp.
848–858;

11. Lazarsfeld, Paul F., Berelson, Bernard, și Gaudet, Hazel, (2004), Mecanismul votului. Cum se decid alegătorii într-
o campanie prezidențială, comunicare.ro;

12. Lou, T. și Tang, J. (2013), „Mining Structural Hole Spanners Through Information Diffusion in Social Networks”, la 
International World Wide Web Conference (IW3C2) , 2013 - 
http://keg.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn/jietang/publications/WWW13-Lou&Tang-Structural-Hole-Information-
Diffusion.pdf 

13. Luoma-Aho, V. (2010). Is social media killing our theories. Communication Research Days. 
http://commres.net/wiki/_media/c/mt/is_social_media_killing_our_theories_luoma-aho-libre.pdf 

14. McLuhan, Marshall (1994), Understanding media: The extensions of man. MIT press;

15. McQuail, Denis și Windahl, Sven, (2004), Modele ale comunicării, comunicare.ro;

16. Obstfeld D., Borgatti, St.P. și Davis J. (2014),„Brokerage as a Process: Decoupling Third Party Action from Social 
Network Structure”, în Contemporary Perspectives on Organizational Social Networks Research in the Sociology 
of Organizations, vol. 40, pp. 135-159.

17. Zhong, Bu (2022), Social Media Communication -Trends and Theories, Wiley Blackwell.

18. Whiting, A. and Williams, D. (2013), "Why people use social media: a uses and gratifications
approach", Qualitative Market Research, Vol. 16 No. 4, pp. 362-369. https://doi.org/10.1108/QMR-06-2013-
0041 

References:



Mandatory readings:

• Berger, Jonah (2013): 
Contagious: Why Things Catch 
on, Simon& Schuster - 
Chapter: Introduction: “Why 
Things Catch On” 

• Christakis, Nicholas și Fowler, 
James (2009) Connected, 
Chapter 2.



• Barabasi, A.-L(2017) Linked-Noua știință a rețelelor,București,Brumar;

• Burt, R. S. (1999), „The social capital of opinion leaders”, în Annals, nr. 566, pp. 37-54.

• Coleman, J. S. (1988). Social capital in the creation of human capital. The American Journal of
Sociology, 94(1) Supplement: Organizations and institutions: Sociological and economic
approaches to the analysis of social structure, 95–120.

• Coleman, J. S. (1990). The Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University
Press.

• Granovetter, M. S. (1973), „The Strength of Weak Ties”, în The American Journal of
Sociology. nr. 78 (6), pp. 1360–1380;

• Granovetter, M. (1983). „The Strength of Weak Ties: A Network Theory Revisited". Sociological
Theory. Vol 1, pp. 201–233;

• Hâncean, M.-G, (2014), Retelele sociale. Teorie, metodologie si aplicatii, Iași, Polirom, pp. 104-
150;

• Lou, T. și Tang, J. (2013), „Mining Structural Hole Spanners Through Information Diffusion in
Social Networks”, la International World Wide Web Conference (IW3C2) , 2013 -
http://keg.cs.tsinghua.edu.cn/jietang/publications/WWW13-Lou&Tang-Structural-Hole-
Information-Diffusion.pdf

• Lee, J. (2017). Social capital expectation and usage of social media: the moderating role of

Bibliography: social capital susceptibility. Behaviour & Information Technology, 36(10), 1067-1080. 
https://doi.org/10.1080/0144929X.2017.1344730

• Milgram, S., (1967), „The Small World Problem”, în Psychology Today, vol.1, nr.1, pp. 61-67;

• Obstfeld D., Borgatti, St.P. și Davis J. (2014),„Brokerage as a Process: Decoupling Third Party
Action from Social Network Structure”, în Contemporary Perspectives on Organizational Social
Networks Research in the Sociology of Organizations, vol. 40, pp. 135-159.

• Opsahl, T., Agneessens, F., Skvoretz, J., (2010), „Node centrality in weighted networks:
Generalizing degree and shortest paths”, în Social Networks nr. 32, pp. 245–251-
http://psychosystems.org/files/summerschool2017/OpsahlAgneessensSkvoretz2010.pdf

• Putnam R., (2000) Bowling Alone: The Collapse and Revival of American Community. New York:
Simon and Schuster,

• Szreter S, și Woolcock M. (2004). Health by association? Social capital, social theory, and the
political economy of public health. Int J Epidemiol.,33(4), pp. 650–667,
https://doi.org/10.1093/ije/dyh013 

• Valente, T.W., Fujimoto, K.,(2010) „Bridging: Locating Critical Connectors in a Network”., în Soc
Networks, nr.32, pp.212–220- https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2889704/

• Voicu, B., (2015), „Capitalul social”, în Mărginean, Ioan și Vasile, Marian (coord), Dicționar de
calitatea vieții, București, Editura Academiei Române, pp. 59-61;

• Watts, D. J., & Strogatz, S. H. (1998). Collective dynamics of ‘small-
world’networks. nature, 393(6684), 440-442.



Barabasi, Albert-Lazlo (2002) Linked. The 
New Science of Networks. Perseus 
Publishing, pp. 25-64

Mandatory
readings : Christakis, Nicholas și Fowler, James (2009) 

Connected. The Surprising Power of Our 
Social Networks and How They Shape Our 
Lives. Little, Brown and Company, chapter 1.